Sādhanā Vol. 34, Part 1, February 2009, pp. 71–144. © Printed in India

A compact kernel for the calculus of inductive constructions
A ASPERTI, W RICCIOTTI, C SACERDOTI COEN and E TASSI
Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna, Italy
e-mail: asperti,ricciott,sacerdot,tassi@cs.unibo.it

Abstract. The paper describes the new kernel for the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC) implemented inside the Matita Interactive Theorem Prover. The
design of the new kernel has been completely revisited since the first release, resulting in a remarkably compact implementation of about 2300 lines of OCaml code.
The work is meant for people interested in implementation aspects of Interactive
Provers, and is not self contained. In particular, it requires good acquaintance with
Type Theory and functional programming languages.
Keywords. Interactive theorem provers; calculus of inductive constructions;
Matita; Kernel.
1. Introduction
We describe in this paper the new kernel for the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (CIC)
(see Werner (1994); Paulin–Mohring (1996); Giménez (1998)) implemented inside the Matita
Interactive Theorem Prover. The kernel is the most delicate component of interactive provers,
in charge of the verification of proofs. Not all interactive provers have a kernel in the above
sense, and not all systems adhere to the so called de Bruijn principle, namely the plea for a
small kernel ((Wiedijk 2006) for a comparison). Still, having a small, clear, well documented,
freely inspectable and easily replicable kernel, seems to be the best warranty for the effective
reliability of the system.
Somehow surprisingly, even among the developers of systems adopting a kernel-oriented
approach, documentation does not seem to be a priority (that is even more surprising considering that the kernel is, usually, a particularly stable part of the system). As far as we
know, our paper is the first extensive description of a system kernel, and in particular the
first detailed discussion of the implementation of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions.
This, even before the technical interest of the paper, is the major novelty of our contribution,
promoting a more transparent (and competitive) attitude to the implementation of interactive
provers, and hopefully paving the way to a stream of similar contributions.
The new Matita kernel is just the first step of a deep revisitation work of the entire system.
Our first implementation of Matita, taking us about 10 man years work, spread over a period of
5 years (Asperti et al 2006) for an account, although already resulting in a competitive system
enabling complex formalization efforts (Asperti & Ricciotti 2008), has been for us mostly
an occasion to acquire a direct experience of the field. Taking advantage of this knowledge,
and of all the lessons learned during the realization of the first Matita prototype, we feel now
71

72

Asperti et al

ready to restart the work from scratch, and to expose, piece by piece, a coherent and meditated
architectural design of the system, and a detailed description of its implementation. The new
kernel, described in this paper, is the first piece of this program.
1.1 A software engineering perspective
Reliability is not the only reason for having a small kernel. The point is that most of the
data structures of the kernel have a direct impact on the rest of the system. For instance, the
structure of the refiner essentially mimics that of the type-checker; hence, a simpler typechecker will likely results in a simpler, more maintainable and hence more adaptable refiner,
that in turn could have a beneficial effect on the chaotic realm of tactics. The complex pipeline
of transformations between the low level CIC term and the user input syntax is still another
aspect of the system where a simplification of the data structures could likely to give rise a
sensible simplification of the code.
The point is that interactive provers have an intrinsic complexity that is hard to understand
and hence to master. A priori, the basic user interaction loop implemented by these applications seems to be quite trivial: the system must read a user command, execute it, update the
system status and present to the user a new view. For this reason, when we completed the
implementation of the first Matita prototype, it was for us a sort of surprise to discover that
we wrote no less than 70·000 lines of OCaml code1 . But the point that is really disconcerting
is that even a posteriori, and in spite of our attempts to analyse and systematize the code, the
reasons for the complexity of these systems (comprising our own!) still remain, for us, quite
puzzling. Our conclusion is that it is due to a myriad of minor design choices not sufficiently
meditated, cumulatively producing a quite aberrant final effect. Trying to correct a posteriori
these wrong choices looks like a desperate effort. Better to restart the implementation from
scratch, following a more careful methodological design. Our final aim is to reduce the dimension of the system at about 40·000 lines of OCaml code, that is little more than the half of the
current dimension of the system. Of course, we are not seeking to have a compact code per
se; the point is that having a simpler system would reduce the number of bugs2 , improve the
maintainability of the system, reduce the training period for new developers, and make easier to modify the application for experimenting new techniques or implementing additional
functionalities. All features that are essential for an avant-guard tool like Matita, explicitly
meant for experimental prototyping and mostly developed by students.
The paper does not provide a formal description of the CIC calculus and its meta-theory for
many reasons. One motivation is that a formal presentation of the calculus and its main properties would escape the software engineering scope of the special issue. Another major motivation is the fact that there is no coherent exposition of the meta-theory of the whole CIC as it is
currently implemented in Coq and Matita. Indeed, the CIC calculus is obtained as an extension
of the Calculus of Constructions (COC) with a hierarchy of universes, primitive inductive and
coinductive types, case analysis operators and constrained recursion. The meta-theory of each
one of these extensions has been provided separately by different authors, and the community
still deserves a unified view of it and also models for the whole calculus (the interested reader
can find some documentation in Paulin-Mohring (1996); Geuvers (1993); Werner (1994);
Giménez (1998); Luo (1990); Muoz (1997)). Moreover, many of these extensions are based
1 That is in any case little more than the half of the code of Coq!
2 When implementing the new version of the Matita kernel with simpler data structures and

invariants, we spotted several bugs in the old kernel version that were hidden by the complexity
of its code.

A compact kernel for the CIC

73

on syntactic approximations of undecidable problems, like termination of recursive functions, which are clearly heuristics. These heuristics have changed during the years, they have
deserved little attention in the literature, and nevertheless their intimate knowledge is necessary for users to exploit the full capabilities of the system.
To conclude, we have decided to accompany the code of Matita with an high level description of the positivity conditions and the termination heuristics for recursive and co-recursive
functions. These are given at the beginning of the sections relative to them, together with

Figure 1. The solid nodes are
the only modules that need to
be trusted, and thus belong to
the kernel. The dashed nodes are
untrusted. In particular, the information retrieved from the library
is always type-checked by the
kernel before usage. For each
module we show the lines of
codes required for the implementation and the number of functions
exported to other modules in the
interface (listed in Appendix B).
Modules names are usually shortened using the acronyms in parentheses.

74

Asperti et al

examples to help the reader to understand the code. Moreover, we recall in Appendix A a
syntax directed version of the type-checking rules for CIC. We do not explain how they are
obtained from the standard type-checking rules since this translation perfectly mimics the one
for the Calculus of Constructions. The Calculus of Constructions is well known and already
documented as a pure type system in Barendregt (1992). A syntax directed presentation of
its rules has been already addressed in van Benthem Jutting et al (1994); Pollack (1994) and
implemented in at least the COQ Huet et al (1998) and LEGO Pollack (1994) systems. The
code of Matita follows this presentation for the PTS part of CIC, which remains a functional
and full PTS.
1.2 The overall structure of the kernel
Figure 1 describes the structure of the kernel modules, and their dependencies.
We have 8 modules, whose content will be briefly described here. The rest of the paper
contains a detailed documentation of their implementation.
NUri: a small module implementing logical names by means of Uniform Resource Identifiers
(URI). We use URIs to locate objects in a library. The untrusted code that maps logical names
(URIs) to physical names (URLs) before retrieving and parsing the object is implemented in
the NCicLibrary module outside the kernel.
NCicEnvironment: the management of the environment of CIC-objects (Section 4·2).
NReference: the data type descriptor for the different constants of CIC (Section 2·1c).
NCic: data structures for the Calculus of Inductive Construction, comprising terms, contexts
and objects (Section 2). The kernel uses an untrusted module NCicPp to pretty-print CIC
terms when reporting errors to the user.
NCicUtils: CIC-iterators and main utility functions (Section 3).
NCicSubstitution: low-level manipulation of terms in de Bruijn notation: lifting and substitution (Section 3·1).
NCicReduction: the reduction machine for the calculus, and the conversion test (Section 5).
NCicTypeChecker: the type synthesis algorithm (Section 6), comprising in particular positivity conditions for inductive types (Section 6·2) and well guardedness (termination) conditions
for recursive functions (Section 6·3).

2. CIC data structures
2.1 Terms
Our description begins with the main data structure we employ for terms of the Calculus. The
concrete syntax adopted by Matita for terms closely reflect the internal data structure and is
very similar to the one adopted by Coq and described in Bertot & Castéran (2004).

A compact kernel for the CIC

75

A term is either a variable (Rel), a metavariable (Meta), an application (Appl), a product
(Prod), a lambda abstraction (Lambda), a let-in construct (LetIn), a defined constant (Const),
a sort (Sort), and implicit term (Implicit), or a case construct (Match).
2.1a Variables, metavariables and implicit terms: Variables are encoded by means of
direct de Bruijn notation, i.e. as the position of the binder (counting from 1) along the path of
the abstract syntax tree leading from the variable occurrence to its binder. Thus, for instance,
λf : . . . λd : . . . (f (f x)) is represented as Lambda(“f”, . . . ,Lambda(“x”, . . . ,Appl ([Rel 2;
Appl ([Rel 2; Rel 1])]))).
A metavariable is a hole in the term. In the Curry–Howard analogy, it also represents a
portion of the proof that has still to be filled-in; the types of metavariables are hence the
goals yet to be solved by the user. The presence of metavariables in the kernel is one of the
distinctive features of Matita w.r.t. Coq: the main advantage is the possibility to check the well
typedness of open terms, resulting in a simpler interface with the refiner3 . The complexity
of the management of metavariables is due to the fact that, after being created (in a given
context, that we call canonical context), due to the possible reduction of the term, they can be
duplicated and moved in different contexts (e.g. moved under different binders). This makes
extremely difficult to manage their successive instantiation, since the instance must be suitably
relocated in the current context of the other occurrences (McBride 1999); Geuvers & Jojgov
(2002). To solve this problem, it is convenient to equip each metavariable with an explicit
substitution. In Matita, to avoid the use of explicit names, the explicit substitution is organized
as a list of terms, defining a local context for the metavariable: when the metavariable will be
instantiated with a term, the free variables of the term will be solved in this local context (that
hence plays the role of a closure). An additional structure, the metasenv, contains the list of
all metavariables, with their canonical contexts and their types. To make an example of how
this information is exploited by unification (outside the kernel), suppose to have two instances
M1 [l1 ] and M2 [l2 ] of a given metavariable (with respective local contexts l1 and l2 ), and that
M1 is instantiated with a term t1 . The first step is to find (according to some heuristics) a term
t such that t[l1 ] = t1 , that is to ‘relocate’ t1 in the canonical context of the metavariable, and
then to instantiate M2 with t[l2 ]. Let us finally stress that, although we allow the presence
of metavariables in the kernel, no unification is running up in it (in particular, nothing in the
kernel depends on heuristics).
The implementation of the local context is one of the novelties of the new Matita kernel. In
fact, by extensive testing of the system, we realized that in most of the cases the local context
3 The refiner is the component, just outside the kernel, in charge of type inference.

76

Asperti et al

(even after duplication) is the identity substitution, while in many others is just a simple shift
operation. Hence we decided to make this two frequent subcases explicit, in order to take
advantage of this information in the implementation of several functions both in the kernel
and outside it.
Implicit terms are a degenerate form of CIC-term (unknown/don’t care term) only meant
for extra-kernel usages. Their degenerate nature is reflected in the fact that no term processed
in kernel should (still) contain an Implicit: all kernel functions return an exception, in this
case. Typical usages are e.g. in prerefinement phases of parsing, or for expressing paths inside
CIC-terms (by ‘pruning’ irrelevant parts).
2.1b Lambda terms, types and sorts: Applications, products, lambda abstractions, let-ins
and sorts are the basic and well known ingredients of typed lambda calculi (Barendregt
1992) for an introduction, and there is little to add, here. The type discipline of the Calculus of Inductive Constructions is based on an impredicative sort Prop of propositions,
and a predicative hierarchy of Universes (Luo 1990) Type i : Type i+1 (Set = Type 0 ).
For flexibility reasons, it is useful to remove fixed universes (of the form Type i ) in favour
of universe variables Type u (where u is an URI) with explicit user-declared constraints
between universe variables (Courant 2002). In Matita we also keep outside the kernel a
boolean, associated to universe variables and used during pretty-printing of formulae, to
choose the presentational flavor (type vs. formula) for inhabitants of the universe. We plan
to let the user dynamically configure these aspects of the type system in the next release of
Matita.
In particular, our representation of universes is a major simplification of that of
EPECC (Courant 2002). The user is allowed to define universe variables (Type being just one
of them) and constraints among universe variables (e.g. Type < Type1). The boolean value
paired with an URI is true when we are taking the successor of a universe variable. A list of
universe variables (or they successors) has to be read as the maximum of its elements. An
empty list represents the smallest universe and is used to type the sort of propositions. Further
informations about this representation of universes will be given in Section 4·3 where we
will also present the data structures employed in the kernel to represent constraints between
universe variables.
As for the other terms, let us just remark that it is worth to keep applications in ‘flat’ normal
form, i.e. without applications in head position of other applications (to be ensured during
substitution); we also implicitly assume that the list of arguments of an application has always
length greater than 1. Another points concerns the let-in construct; in our first implementation
of Matita the type of the named term was optional, and we had to cache the inferred type to
avoid duplicate work, for instance during type-checking; a posteriori it is simpler to have it
always explicit, at the price of inferring it outside the kernel when the user does not want to
give it explicitly.
2.1c Constants: The design of constants is the point where the new Matita kernel differs
more sensibly from our first implementation and from the current Coq kernel. Under the
generic name of constants we are in fact grouping names referring to six different kind
of objects: declarations (axioms, variables, . . . ), definitions (functions, theorems, . . . ),
recursive and co-recursive functions, (co)inductive types and constructors of (co)inductive
types. In particular, each constant is equipped with a descriptor of type reference, defined as
follows:

A compact kernel for the CIC

type spec =
| Decl
| Def of int
(∗ height ∗)
| Fix of int ∗ int ∗ int (∗ ﬁxno , recparamno, height ∗)
| CoFix of int
| Ind of bool ∗ int ∗ int (∗ inductive , indtyno, leftno ∗)
| Con of int ∗ int ∗ int (∗ indtyno, constrno, leftno ∗)
type reference = Ref of NUri.uri ∗ spec



77




A reference is a couple (u, s) where u is its (long) name, and s is the descriptor of the
object, of type spec. The first argument of Fix and CoFix is the number of the function in a
block of mutually recursive (resp. corecursive) ones; in addition, the Fix constructor also takes
the number of the ‘recursive parameter’, that is of the argument that is supposed to decrease
during reduction (used to trigger the reduction of fixpoints, see Section 5). The last parameter
of Def and Fix is the height of the constant, expressing the maximum chain of dependencies
between the given constant and the library objects it depends upon. The first parameter of Ind
makes a distinction between inductive and coinductive types: the information is already in
the object declaration, but is replicated in the reference to avoid a few lookups during typechecking. The second parameter of Ind (the first of Con) is the number of the inductive type
in a block of mutually inductive ones; the second parameter of Con is the number of the given
constructor. In both Ind and Con the number of left parameters (see Sec. 2·3) of the inductive
type is replicated to avoid few lookups during reduction.
The major paradigm shift w.r.t the old kernel concerns the decision to move the definition of
(co)fixpoints from the level of terms to the level of objects, resulting in a drastic simplification
of the kernel code, and with the only drawback of loosing the possibility to declare nested
fixpoints (this does not imply a loss of expressiveness, since by the technique of lambda lifting
(Johnsson 1985) we may always move up inner functions).
2.1d Matching: The last component of the syntax of terms is match. As a first approximation,
its usage is similar to the match-with statement of ML-like languages, where the role of
constructors in patterns is played by inductive type constructors. A match-term depends on
four arguments (u, T , t, pl). t is the matching term, its type must be an inductive type with
name (uri) u; pl is a list of bodies for the different branches of the match (as many as the
number of constructors of the inductive type); each branch is explicitly abstracted over the
input arguments of the corresponding constructor. Finally, T is the so called result type. Due
to the dependent type discipline, the type checker would not be always able to guess a uniform
result type for all branches, and this must hence be explicitly provided (see Section 6 for a
detailed discussion).
2.2 Context, metasenv and substitution
Each term lives in a context containing definitions or declarations for its free variables;
moreover, all its free metavariables are either declared in a metasenv, or instantiated by a
substitution.

78

Asperti et al

The context− entry type should be clear. An hypothesis is just a named context− entry, where
the name is simply a string. A context is a list of hypothesis. A conjecture is a metavariable
declaration: it depends on three arguments (s, c, T ) where s is an optional name, c is the
canonical context discussed in the previous section, and T is the type of the metavariable
(obviously, w.r.t. its canonical context). A metasenv is a list of pairs associating to each
metavariable (identified by an integer) its declaration.
The natural complement of the metasenv is the substitution, that is a list of pairs associating
to a metavariable a declaration subst− entry, that is a tuple (s, c, t, T ) where s is an optional
name, c is the canonical context, t is the term instantiating the metavariable, and T is the type
of t.
2.3 Objects
An object is a possibly incomplete definition, declaration or theorem made of closed terms.
Generic attributes referring to all kind of objects are hence its name (uri), its depth (defined
as the maximum of the depth of the objects occurring in its definition plus one), a metasenv
and a subst (usually empty). Since the depth is mainly used to drive the unfolding of terms
during the conversion test, if the object does not have a body (axioms, inductive types and so
on) the depth is conventionally set to 0.








(∗ invariant: metasenv and substitution have disjoint domains ∗)
type obj kind =
| Constant of relevance ∗ string ∗ term option ∗ term ∗ c attr
| Fixpoint of bool ∗ inductiveFun list ∗ f attr
(∗ true → ﬁx, funcs, arrts ∗)
| Inductive of bool ∗ int ∗ inductiveType list ∗ i attr
(∗ true → inductive, leftno , types ∗)
(∗ the int must be 0 if the object has no body ∗)
type obj = NUri.uri ∗ int ∗ metasenv ∗ substitution ∗ obj kind

We have three main kinds of objects: (non recursive) Constants, blocks of recursive (or
corecursive) functions, and blocks of inductive (or coinductive) types.
The simplest kind is a Constant, taking five arguments (r, t, T , a). t is an optional body
(for instance, axioms do not have a body), T is its type, and a is a list of attributes, containing
information about the object not relevant for the kernel, but useful for many other functionalities of the system. r is a new, experimental argument aimed to integrate proof irrelevance
(see Miquel & Werner (2003); Werner (2008)) into Matita: it is a list of boolean parameters
expressing, for each of the input arguments of the constant, its ‘relevance’ in view of conversion (see Section 5·2).

A compact kernel for the CIC

79

A Fixpoint is a block of mutually recursive functions (or mutually corecursive, if the first
boolean argument is false). Apart from attributes, it is just a list of (co)recursive functions,
defined by a relevance list for arguments, a local name to distinguish functions of a same block,
the number of the recursive parameter (i.e. of the argument which is supposed to structurally
decrease during reduction, in order to guarantee termination), the body of the function and
its type.








(∗ relevance , name, recno, ty, bo ∗)
type inductiveFun = relevance ∗ string ∗ int ∗ term ∗ term
(∗ if coinductive, the int has no meaning and must be set to −1 ∗)

An Inductive object, is a block of mutually defined inductive types (resp. coinductive, if
the first boolean argument is false). Apart from attributes, and the list of (co)inductive types,
it is made of a leftno parameter. Actually, each Inductive object is a family of types, indexed
over a given number of fixed parameters, which are supposed to appear identical as initial
sources in all the types of the inductive objects and associated constructors belonging to the
block. In lack of an agreed terminology, and due to their initial positions in types, we simply
call these arguments left parameters. We call right parameters the remaining sources in the
type of the inductive definition4 . Hence, leftno is simply the number of left parameters of the
block. The use of left parameters will be explained in Sections 5 and 6.








type constructor = relevance ∗ string ∗ term (∗ id , type ∗)
type inductiveType =
relevance ∗ string ∗ term ∗ constructor list
(∗ relevance , typename, arity, constructors ∗)

Finally, each inductive type is simply defined by a relevance list, a name, a type and its
constructor list; a constructor has a relevance list, a name and a type.
4 The terminology adopted by Dybjer (Dybjer 1997) for what we call left parameters is simply

parameters, while he uses indexes in place of right parameter

80

Asperti et al

2.4 Other changes w.r.t. the old Matita kernel
In this section, we discuss some other important changes in the CIC datatype, not directly
visible in the new syntax.
The first important modification is in the structure of the contexts. In the old kernel, the
hypothesis composing the contexts were optional, reflecting the fact that they could no longer
be accessible (typically, as a result of an explicit clear command of the user). This decision
(that looked quite natural at the time) has in fact a quite nasty impact in several parts of the
code. The biggest problem is that the clear operation is performed on a given instance of
a metavariable (the current goal), but the clear operation must be reflected in its canonical
context in the metasenv, and hence propagated (possibly, on demand) to all other instances. In
other words, the optional nature of the context entries, was naturally reflected in the optional
nature of the arguments in the local contexts, and the problem was to keep in synch the local
contexts of the different instances, both between them and with the canonical context.
With the current implementation, a clear operation involves the creation of a fresh new
metavariable with a restricted canonical context, and a unification between this metavariable
and the old one.
At the object level, all object declarations were equipped by a list of parameters, which
played the role of instantiatable axioms. The invocations of an object had an explicit substitution possibly instantiating these parameters with CIC terms. These explicit substitutions were
the Matita analog of Coq sections, and the instantiatable axioms corresponded to Coq section
variables. They were mostly introduced in Matita for compatibility purposes. The double role
of instantiatable axioms (as axioms and as binders) interfered with the indexing and searching tools of Matita, since axioms had to be indexed when used as axioms by the user, but
not when used as abstractions. Moreover, after extensive use of the system, no Matita user
has apparently felt the need of using such a feature, and we believe that it should be possible to find better alternatives. Thus we decided to remove it from the new kernel. In general,
the management of sections (and palliatives) inside the kernel seems to be a clear mistake: it
complicates in a sensible way the management of objects, for purposes which are mostly of
an extra-logical (presentational) nature.
Another major change with respect to the previous kernel is the adoption of algebraic
universes to represent inferred types, which we have already discussed, and the choice of
abandon inference of universes, which used to performed in the old kernel and that has
been replaced by checking of user provided constraints in the spirit, and with the same
advantages, of EPECC Courant (2002). The new representation also allowed us to drop the
special treatment of the CProp sort in the old kernel. The CProp sort was a special type universe
inhabited by constructive logical connectives. Notationally, its inhabitants were presented to
the user as formulae; semantically, the universe corresponded to a predicative universe of
computationally relevant terms, and it was contained in Type0. In the new kernel we can
simply represent CProp as a universe variable, constrained to be strictly smaller than the first
universe variable and recognized outside the kernel by the pretty-printer in order to print its
inhabitants as formulae. Indeed, we can let the user decide whether inhabitants of declared
universe variables are meant to represent formulae or types. This was not possible in the old
kernel where each occurrence of Type was associated to a fresh universe variable whose URI
was not known in advance and whose constraints were dynamically computed by universe
inference.
A minor difference between the old and the new kernel is the management of non dependent
binders. In the old kernel, the name carried by binders was optional, resulting in additional

A compact kernel for the CIC

81

case distinctions all over the code, with the only benefit in pretty-printing (done outside the
kernel). It is the pretty-printer that is now responsible of detecting anonymous binders (for
instance to show non dependent products as implications and not as universal quantifications).
Another minor difference, that greatly simplified and reduced the size of the type-checking
rules for pattern matching, is having dropped the non dependent form of pattern matching.
In the old kernel, mostly by compatibility with objects from the Coq library, we used to have
a simplified representation for matches whose branches could be typed without quantifying
on the matched term. However, the alternative representation doubled the number of cases
and introduced additional code to infer whose representation was in use and to compare
semantically equivalent terms with different representations.
We have also purged casts from the new kernel. A cast is a term constructor made of a term
and a type, subject to the typing constraint that requires the provided type to be convertible
with the type inferred for the provided term. Casts are sometimes added by the user or by
tactics that generate terms outside the kernel in order to drive type inference (also done outside
the kernel). In the next version of Matita we plan to use a let-in (that carry an explicitly given
type for the definiens) to provide the same functionality.

3. Iterators
One of our motivations for writing a new kernel for the Matita prover was to clean up and
factorize the code of the old system, taking advantage of the experience acquired since the first
writing. According to this philosophy, we decided to make a more systematic use of generic
iterators over the CIC data type. The general idea for their usage is that the programmer is in
charge of writing the interesting cases, delegating then to the iterator the management of the
remaining ones. This has the drawback of repeating pattern matching on the input term at each
function call, one in the user function and one in the iterator, but this is largely compensated
by the compactness and readability of the resulting code.
Our first iterator is a fold function, with the following type

val fold :
(NCic.hypothesis → ’k → ’k) → ’k →
(’ k → ’a → NCic.term → ’a) → ’a → NCic.term → ’a






The role of the parameters g, k, f , acc and t is the following: fold visits the term t accumulating
in acc the result of the applications of f to subterms; k is an input parameter for f and should
be understood as the information required by f in order to correctly process a subterm. This
information may (typically) change when passing binders, and in this case the function g is
in charge to update k.
Here is the formal definition:

82

Asperti et al

The fold function returns an exception in the case of a Meta, in order to force the use to
re-implement this delicate case. Note, the usage of g in the case of binders, to compute a new
value of k in terms of the context entry trespassed.
As an example of its usage, let us consider the function does− not− occur context n nn t, in
charge of checking that the term t does not contain variables in the interval (n, nn], under the
assumption (precondition) that no variable in (n, nn] occurs in the types of the variables that
are declared in context and that hereditary occur in t.5

The interesting case is that of a variable. Here, we have to check that it is outside the interval
(n, nn] taken in input; however, since we passed k binders, the interval must be relocated to
(n + k, nn + k]. In this case, the number k of binders traversed so far is the only information
required by f , and the g function has just to increment it.
A second important iterator is map.

val map:
(NCic.hypothesis → ’k → ’k) → ’k →
(’ k → NCic.term → NCic.term) → NCic.term → NCic.term






The role of the parameters g, k, f , and t is the following: map visits the term t mapping
subterms via the f function. The function f may depend on an additional parameter k which
5 In other words, t remains well typed in the context obtained dropping the declaration of all

variables in (n, nn] and all the following declarations and definitions that refer to them.

A compact kernel for the CIC

83

is supposed to be updated by g when passing binders. The definition of map is similar to fold
and we omit it; the only interesting peculiarity of our code is that, due to its frequent use, it
has been carefully optimized to preserve sharing of all subterms left untouched by the map.
3.1 Lifting and substitution
Typical examples of use of the map functions are the elementary operations for the management of terms with de Bruijn indices: lift and subst.
As it is well known, adopting a syntax based on de Bruijn indices, we do not have to worry
about α-conversion, but
(i) we need to introduce a lifting operation to relocate the free variables of a term when
moving it in a different context;
(ii) when substituting the first de Bruijn index in a term M for an argument N , we must:
(a) lift each replacement copy of N of the suitable quantity (the depth of the variable
occurrence), (b) decrement all free variables of M by 1, to take into account the fact that
one binder reference has been solved.
The definition the lifting operation is completely standard.

let lift from k n =
let rec liftaux k = function
| C.Rel m as t → if m < k then t else C.Rel (m + n)
| C.Meta (i,(m,l)) as t when k <= m →
if n = 0 then t else C.Meta (i,(m+n,l))
| C.Meta ( ,(m,C.Irl l )) as t when k > l + m → t
| C.Meta (i,(m,l)) →
let lctx = NCicUtils.expand local context l in
C.Meta (i, (m, C.Ctx (HExtlib.sharing map (liftaux (k−m)) lctx)))
| C.Implicit → (∗ was the identity ∗) assert false
| t → NCicUtils.map (fun k → k + 1) k liftaux t
in
liftaux k
let lift ?(from=1) n t =
if n = 0 then t
else lift from from n t







The substitution operation is so important that, in the old Matita code we had four almost
identical versions of it, independently written in different parts of the code, and by different
people: the base case, a parallel substitution operation, another copy to instantiate a term with
a local context of a metavariable, and still another copy to solve the result of a computation
of the reduction machine w.r.t. its environment (see Section 5). All this versions have been
unified by the following function.

val psubst :
?avoid beta redexes:bool → (’a → NCic.term) → ’a list → NCic.term → NCic.term






In the call psubst avoid− beta− redexes:false map− arg args t the role of arguments is the
following: t is the term inside which we must substitute the elements of the args list; these
elements are not necessarily CIC terms, hence a map− arg map is used to transform them into

84

Asperti et al

the right data type (or to just manipulate them, such as lifting them of some additional value);
the optional avoid− beta− redexes parameter (set to false by default) automatically reduces any
β-redex obtained by instantiation in the spirit of hereditary substitution. The latter provides
some speed-up in the conversion check between an expected user provided type (like a type
in a binder) and an inferred type that is obtained by substitution for a variable a λ-abstraction.
The reason is that the latter contains β-redexes, which can be deeply nested in the term,
whereas the former, being user provided, is likely to be β-redex free. Small deep differences
in the two terms are sufficient to block certain optimizations performed during conversion
(see Section 5·2).

A couple of interesting instances of psubst are the following functions:

A compact kernel for the CIC

85

4. Library environment
4.1 Library module

exception ObjectNotFound of string Lazy.t
val get obj : NUri.uri → NCic.obj






The library module provides access to a mathematical repository by means of a function from
names (URIs) to objects. An exception can be raised when a name does not correspond to any
object. The new kernel of Matita relies on the existence of an implementation for a library
module. However, it does not trust in any way this implementation: after retrieving an object
from the library, the object is type-checked before adding it to the environment.
Currently, we provide two implementations of the library. The first one grant access to a
distributed XML repository of objects respecting the format of the new kernel. The second
one is a wrapper around the library of the old kernel implementation. Every time an old object
is requested, we type-check it using the old kernel and we translate it to the new format. We
also exploit memoization to avoid translating the same object multiple times.
The translation performs two major transformations on the terms. The first one transforms
the Fixpoint terms of the old kernel into Fixpoint objects on the new one. This requires a
λ-lifting technique (Johnsson 1985), see also Peyton–Jones (1987) to hoist local definitions
out of their surrounding context into a fixed set of closed global functions. The main difficulty
is due to the fact that equality of CIC-terms is structural, while objects are identified by name.
Thus, during λ-lifting, we need to map structurally equal local functions to a single object.
We achieve this by means of an heuristics based on a cache of already translated recursive
functions. The heuristics may fail when a recursive function definition occurs twice in the
library, but in one occurrence some of its free variables have been instantiated. For this reason,
we have been able to test the new kernel on most of the 35000 old objects coming from the
Coq proof assistant library, but not on all of them (the problem is only due to the heuristics
used in the automatic translation, not to a loss of expressiveness of the typing system).
The second major transformation consists in fixing universes in the terms. The old kernel,
as the one of Coq, used to perform inference of universes: the user wrote terms containing
a single unspecified universe Type; the kernel made a fresh instance of each occurrence of
the universe and it inferred a graph of constraints whose nodes were the universes and whose
edges were inclusion constraints collected during type-checking. The detection of a cycle in
the graph corresponds to the discovery of a logical inconsistency and implies the rejection of
the object that induces the cycle.
The main drawback of universe inference is that it can become quite expensive, especially in
a system with the granularity of Matita, where each object is a separate entity requiring its own
universe graph (in the old kernel, up to 30% of the type-checking time was consumed by the
management of universes). Moreover, the code for universe inference, though conceptually

86

Asperti et al

simple, is big and error prone. It is also unclear why the kernel should be responsible of
universe inference, since other kind of inferences are performed outside the kernel. Finally,
this technique was invented to leave freedom to the user of building libraries with very
complex constraint graphs, but it overkills the problem. Indeed, most of the developments to
be found in the Coq and Matita libraries only need 2 universes (and the second one seems to
be used mainly to perform reflection, see Barthe et al (1995)). This should not be a surprise,
since the logical power of using i + 1 universes corresponds to the existence of the first i
inaccessible cardinals in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (Werner 1997). Finally, some users like
the predicativists of the Formal Topology school want to have a tight control and visibility of
the universes used, which is exactly what is made transparent by universe inference.
For all these reasons, the new kernel only performs universe constraints checking in the
spirit of Courant (2002). Universe inference is performed once and for all during translation
of old objects to the new syntax. Moreover, the graph is collapsed as much as possible by
identifying nodes that are allowed to be merged. The result on the library of Matita is just a
graph with two nodes.
4.2 Environment module
The environment module is in charge of the management of well typed objects. The environment module and the type-checking module (described in Section 6) need to be mutually
recursive: when a reference to an object is found during reduction or type-checking, the object
must be retrieved from the environment; when the environment is asked for an object in the
library that has not been typed yet, it must ask the type-checker to verify it before adding it to
the set of verified objects6 . To solve the mutual recursion the following function is provided,
in order to allow the typechecker to properly set the typecheck− obj function.








let typecheck obj,already set = ref (fun → assert false ), ref false
let set typecheck obj f =
if ! already set then assert false
else begin typecheck obj := f; already set := true end

The environment maintains two data structures: the set of already typed objects from the
library and the set of objects being typed in this moment. The first set is assumed to be quite
large, since it must eventually contain all the objects in the current user development and
all the objects they refer to. We choose to represent the set using an hash-table from URIs
to objects tagged with ‘WellTyped or to exceptions tagged with ‘Exn. The choice of a data
structure with an efficient retrieval time is fundamental, since retrieval is performed during
reduction and during type-checking almost every time a reference is considered. Insertion in
the data structure is performed only once for each object that enters the environment, and
only after type-checking that is an expensive operation.
We represent the second set as a stack of pairs (URI,object). Every time the environment
retrieves an object from the library, it pushes it on top of the stack (that we call the set of frozen
objects, or simply the frozen stack). Then it invokes the type-checker and, after completion,
it moves the object from the stack to the set of type-checked objects. When a reference is
6 This top-down management of the environment, where objects are type-checked only on demand,

is a peculiarity of Matita that we keep from the old kernel Sacerdoti Coen (2004b). Less documentcentric and less library oriented proof assistants like Coq typecheck objects in bottom-up order,
starting checking of an object only after that of all its dependencies.

A compact kernel for the CIC

87

met during type-checking, the environment verifies that the object referred to is not part of
the frozen list. If this happens, the object contains a recursive dependency on itself, which is
logically unsound.
The main function of the module is the following get− checked− obj.

First of all, the function looks for an URI in the frozen list to detect cycles in the library,
i.e. objects defined in terms of themselves. If this is not the case, the hash-table is used to
retrieve the type-checker verdict, in case the objects was met before. If this fails, the object
is retrieved from the untrusted library, frozen, type-checked and unfrozen. If type-checking
fails, the frozen object is removed from the list, and the failure is recorded in the cache (but in
cases of a Sys.Break7 ). Moreover, if the frozen list is not empty, the failure is propagated by
7 This special exception, which is meant to be caught only at the top level, is raised when the user

wants to stop the action currently performed by the system, which is taking too long.

88

Asperti et al

means of a local exception propagate, that allows to have a better diagnostic of the dependency
error.


exception Propagate of NUri.uri ∗ exn





This exception, that cannot escape the function, is caught once for each frozen object, which
is removed from the stack before remembering in the hash-table that the object is not welltyped since it depends on a bad object.
The get− checked− obj function may raise one of the three following exceptions:

exception CircularDependency of string Lazy.t
exception ObjectNotFound of string Lazy.t
exception BadDependency of string Lazy.t






The first exception is raised when an object is defined in terms of itself, either directly or by
means of a loop in the library. The second exception re-defines the library module exception
with the same name. It is raised when the environment is unable to retrieve an object from
the library. The third exception is raised when an object depends on another object that is not
well typed. No other exception can be raised by functions in this module.
The cache clearly acts as a data structure to memorize previous invocations of the typechecker. In case of excessive memory consumption, rarely used objects could be removed
from the cache, at the price of remembering at least their MD5 sum in order to avoid re-typing
them when they get referenced again. The MD5 sum is also necessary in case of modifications
to the library, to avoid type-checking an object using two alternative versions of a second
object referenced twice.
4.3 Universes hierarchy
Our data type for algebraic universes was presented in Section 2·1b. An algebraic universe
is the representation of a universe as a formula over universe variables built by means of
successors of universes (to type an existent universe) and maximum of a list of universes (to
type products). This is the representation of algebraic universes in EPECC Courant (2002).
However, our data structure only allows to represent a small subset of all algebraic universes.
In particular, we can not represent the type of terms containing universes which are not all
variables. Concretely, this allows us to represent all types inferred for user provided terms,
which can only refer to universe variables, but it does not allow to represent types inferred
for already inferred types.
This is not a limitation since the typing rules of the calculus never check the type of an
inferred type. The main difference w.r.t. EPECC is, for instance, that we do not allow the user
to write Type + 1 explicitly: he must give a name to that universe and force it to be bigger than
Type. All benefits of EPECC are preserved: the implementation is rather simple (and much
simpler than that of EPECC, see Section 4·2) and good error messages can be presented to the
user, since he explicitly declares constraints and the kernel just checks that needed constraints
are declared. This implies that a universe inconsistency message is displayed only when the
user defines a new type variable, while a missing constraint exception can be reported during
type checking, and that constraint will act only on universes the user explicitly declared (or
on an algebraic expression involving the maximum and the successor).

A compact kernel for the CIC

89

Since the user is allowed to declare universe variables, we do not provide any pre-defined
universe. However, since Prop is a sort and since the kernel must be able to infer a type for
it, we need an algebraic universe with the property of being included in any user declared
universe. We simply represent it with type0, which is the neutral element of the maximum of
a list of universes, represented by the empty list.




let type0 = []
let le constraints = ref [] (∗ constraints : ( strict , a, b) ∗)





User provided constraints form the constraints graph, which is simply stored in the list of
constraints le− constraints. According to our experience, it is really uncommon to have more
than two universe variables and thus a more sophisticated structure is not needed. Constraints
are triples, the former component is a boolean defining the constraint (less or equal, strictly
less) holding between the second and third components (two universe variables).




let rec le path uri avoid strict a b =
(not strict && NUri.eq a b) ||
List . exists
(fun ( strict ’, x,y) →
NUri.eq y b && not (List.exists (NUri.eq x) avoid) &&
le path uri (x :: avoid) ( strict && not strict’) a x
) ! le constraints
let leq path a b = le path uri [b] ( fst a) (snd a) b





Checking for constraints satisfiability amounts at looking for paths between universe variables walking on constraints. The le− path− uri function uses the avoid accumulator to store
already visited universes to avoid loops, while strict is set to true when the path we are looking for has to cross at least one strict constraint. The algorithm is based on the following
inductive definitions, where ·1 represent the unitary length path.
a ≤ b ⇐⇒ ∃c. a ≤ c ∧ (c <1 b ∨ c ≤1 b)
a < b ⇐⇒ ∃c. (a < c ∧ c ≤1 b) ∨ (a ≤ c ∧ c <1 b)

90

Asperti et al

User defined constraints are processed with add− constraint, and if the new constraint leads
to inconsistency (i.e. Typej < Typei && Typei <= Typej) an exception is raised. The two
functions universe− eq and universe− leq are used in the conversion check, see Section 5, and
during the type checking of inductive definitions, see Section 6·1.
5. Reduction and conversion
The most distinguishing feature of CIC is its computational nature. The logic embeds a
schematic but powerful functional programming language, hence programs can not only be
encoded in CIC and proved correct, but also run within the logic. This opens the doors to
many applications, like for example reflecting decision procedures inside the logic, proving
them correct and running them to solve open conjectures (Barthe et al (1995); Boutin (1997);
Werner (2008)). This technique is not only elegant, but also proved to be essential in huge
formalization efforts, like the proof of the four colour theorem (Gonthier 2005).
The developers of the Coq system (INRIA’s original implementation of the Calculus of
Inductive Constructions) have recently pushed this idea up to equip (a version of) the kernel
with a proper compiler Grégoire (2003) for CIC-terms. This technique, although debatable
when considering the additional non trivial amount of code one has to trust, provides great
computational power, allowing to internalize and run bigger programs.
Matita, being born as light tool for experimentations, adopts a more high-level and flexible
approach to reduction. It uses a generic environment machine abstracted over the reduction
strategy, allowing to define, test and compare different strategies with a minimal programming
effort.
5.1 Reduction
Reduction is defined for CIC terms that are closed in a given environment, described in
Section 4·2, and context, defined in Section 2. CIC has several one step reduction rules, with
different traditional names that we rapidly recall here:
• β-reduction: This is the classical reduction step of the λ-calculus:
λx : T .M N → M{N/x}.
The application of the function λx : T .M to the argument N results in substituting the argument for the formal parameter x in the body M of the function. In terms of de Bruijn indices,
the variable x has index 1, and the substitution operation is that described in Section 3·1.
• δ-reduction: This is constant unfolding. It comprises both the expansion of a top level
constant (i.e. a CIC object built with the Constant constructor) and the unfolding of a local
definition already pushed on the context (i.e. a de Bruijn index pointing to a Def context entry).
• ι-reduction: It is a pattern matching step involving terms of the form.
Match (− ,− ,kj,[p1;. . . ;pm]).
To trigger the reduction, the recursive argument kj must be the constructor of an inductive
type, possibly applied to some arguments, some instantiating the left arguments followed by
some parameters args. A pj branch corresponding to such constructor is then selected in the
list [p1;. . . ;pm] and the resulting reduct is the application of pj to args. A justification for
dropping the left parameters is given in section 6 when discussing the type checking of pattern
matching.

A compact kernel for the CIC

91

• μ-unfolding: This reduction step unfolds the body of a recursive function and is triggered
only when its recursive argument is a constructor. This is usually considered a constrained
δ-reduction step.
• ν-unfolding: This step unfolds the body of a corecursive function, whenever it occurs as
the matching argument of a ι-rule.
The transitive and reflexive closure of these reduction steps is called reduction (and thus
t is a reduct of itself) and its symmetric closure is the so called conversion equivalence
relation. This relation allows the calculus to identify types, and especially dependent types
(types/proposition containing occurrences of terms) up to reduction. For instance, with typical
arithmetical definitions, the two expressions x = 2 and x = 1 + 1 would not only be logically
equivalent: they would be convertible (i.e. identical).
Since the reduction relation is strongly normalizing on well typed terms, conversion is trivially decidable by reducing both terms to their normal form and syntactically comparing them.
Anyway computation is expensive, and it is important to avoid unnecessary computations to
obtain good type checking performances. This suggests that, to check if two terms fall in the
same equivalence class, a controlled parallel reduction of both may lead to success before
reaching the normal form. For example, having defined times in terms of plus, 100 ∗ 100 and
100 + 99 ∗ 100 can be judged to be equal only performing few reduction steps on the former
term.
The literature suggests (Crégut 1990); Asperti (1992); Crégut (2007) that (weak) head
normal forms provides good intermediate points to break normalization. We further refine
this idea by exploiting the height of constants (Sacerdoti Coen 2007) (statically computed at
the moment of their definition): let E be an environment, the height h(c) of a constant c such
that E(c) = t is defined by h(c) = 1 + max h(c ) where c ∈ t if c occurs in t. If no constant
c ∈t

occurs in c the height of c is 0.
An empirical observation confirms that a term Appl [c1;t1;. . . ;tn] whose δ-reduct further
reduces to Appl [c2;s1;. . . ;sm] is most of the time8 characterized by the property h(c1) >
h(c2). We can exploit heights for controlled δ-reduction, that will came into hand during
conversion.
For instance, consider the two convertible terms 100 ∗ 100 and 100 + 99 ∗ 100 that both
have a δ-redex in head position. The former term reduces to the latter and since product is
defined in terms of addition, we have h(∗) > h(+). Thus it is a good idea to perform head
reduction on the first term unless a δ-redex in head position of height less or equal than h(+)
is found. If the reduced term has height h(+), we can hope that its head is an addition and that
the two terms are now convertible. This is indeed the case in our not so artificial example.
We believe that the computation of the weak head normal form up to the unfolding of
constants having a given height rarely performs useless reduction steps (not necessary to
check the conversion of two terms).
In the following we first describe the machinery to compute the (δ-reduction constrained)
weak head normal form of a term, and then we present the conversion algorithm.
5.1a Reduction strategies: To allow the study of different reduction strategies, we used a
generic environment abstract machine (called GKAM in Sacerdoti Coen (2004a)), that allows
to implement almost every reduction strategy properly instantiating an OCaml functor (higher
order module).
8 This may fail with highly polymorphic functions that, when applied, can reduce to terms of any

type. An example is the polymorphic functions that computes the head of a list.

92

Asperti et al

A typical environment machine like Krivine’s abstract machine (KAM) is made of an
environment, a code and a stack. The code is the term to be reduced. Its free variables are
assigned values by the environment, that plays the role of an explicit simultaneous substitution.
When an application is processed, its argument is moved to the stack together with a pointer
to the environment, forming a closure. When a λ-abstraction (part of a β-redex) is processed,
the top of the stack is simply moved to the top of the environment. Finally, when a de Bruijn
index n is processed, the n-th component of the stack is fetched and becomes the new term
to be processed (together with the new environment).
The GKAM generalizes the KAM in three ways:
(i) Reduction of the argument is allowed when it is moved to the stack, to the environment or
in code position. In this way, a large variety of reduction strategies can be implemented.
(ii) The data structures of the elements of the stack and of the environment become parameters. This helps in implementing strategies such as call-by-need. As a consequence, we
also introduce as parameters read-back functions from stack and environment items to
terms. The last two functions will not be used directly by the reduction machine during
its computation, but to reconstruct the CIC-term corresponding to a configuration (i.e.
when the reduction stops). This is performed by the following code





let rec unwind (k,e,t, s) =
let t =
if k = 0 then t
else
NCicSubstitution.psubst ˜avoid beta redexes:true
(RS.from env for unwind ˜unwind) e t
in
if s = [] then t
else C.Appl(t::(RS.from stack list for unwind ˜unwind s))



(iii) The machine is extended to CIC.
The OCaml module system allows to define functors, that are functions from modules to
modules. This mechanism allows to define higher order modules, that can be instantiated with
every module that satisfies the input signature of the functor.
Every reduction strategy, defines the types of objects living in the stack and in the environment, but their type is not known in advance, thus the generic reduction machine will be only
able to manipulate its stack and environment by means of functions provided by the reduction
strategy. The signature a reduction strategy module has to inhabit follows.

A compact kernel for the CIC

93

The initial configuration of the reduction machine for the reduction of a term t is
(0, [], t, []). The first integer is the length of the environment and is used only to speed up
some computations.
Given the unwind function the following requirements are necessary for the soundness of
the reduction strategy (but cannot be expressed by the OCaml type system):
1. ∀t, e. from− stack− list− for− unwind (RS.to− stack t (k,e,t,[])) is a reduct of unwind (k,e,t,[])
2. ∀s. from− env− for− unwind (RS.to− env s) is a reduct of from− stack− list− for− unwind s
3. ∀e. unwind (RS.from− env e) is a reduct of from− env− for− unwind e
The recursive function reduce takes in input a constant height delta, a context and a configuration. The context is a CIC context, orthogonal to the one carried in the reduction machine
configuration, and fixed for the whole reduction process. The subst argument is an optional
metavariable substitution.

The auxiliary function defined inside reduce proceeds by pattern matching on the head
term. The first two cases are for de Bruijn indices. If the index points to a term stored in the
machine environment, RS.from− env is called on the n-th element of the machine environment
to obtain a new machine configuration whose stack is prepended to the current one. If the
length of the environment is less then n the variable has not been substituted by reduction,
but it may be bound to a local definition in the context. In that case the definiens is retrieved,
and is expanded lifted in the current context (moved under n-k binders). Otherwise the term
is in head normal form and the reduction machine stops.





| (k, e, C.Meta (n,l), s) as conﬁg →
(try
let , , term, = NCicUtils.lookup subst n subst in
aux (k, e, NCicSubstitution.subst meta l term,s)
with NCicUtils.Subst not found → conﬁg)



94

Asperti et al

Metavariables are considered in normal form, unless the input argument subst contains an
entry for them. If that entry exists, the substituted term is instantiated in the actual context
using the explicit substitution l, and is recursively reduced.




| ( ,
| ( ,
| ( ,
| ( ,

, C.Implicit , ) → assert false
, C.Sort , )
, C.Prod , )
, C.Lambda , []) as conﬁg → conﬁg





Implicit arguments should never reach the kernel, thus this case is not considered. Sorts
are in normal form by definition, thus no step is performed in these cases. The same holds for
products and unapplied λ-abstractions (i.e. when the stack is empty).




| (k, e, C.Lambda ( , ,t), p :: s) →
aux (k+1, (RS.stack to env ˜reduce:aux ˜unwind p)::e, t,s)
| (k, e, C.LetIn ( , ,m,t), s) →
let m’ = RS.compute to env ˜reduce:aux ˜unwind k e m in
aux (k+1, m’::e, t , s)





When a λ-abstraction is encountered with a non empty stack, the first item of the stack is
moved to the environment with the RS.stack− to− env function, and the body of the abstraction
is recursively processed. When a local definition is encountered, its definendum is moved
directly to the environment (thanks to RS.compute− to− env) leaving the stack untouched.




| ( , , C.Appl ([]|[ ]), ) → assert false
| (k, e, C.Appl (he:: tl ), s) →
let tl ’ =
List .map (fun t→ RS.compute to stack ˜reduce:aux ˜unwind (k,e,t,[])) tl
in
aux (k, e, he, tl ’ @ s)





When an application is encountered, all arguments are pushed on the stack with
RS.compute− to− stack and the head is recursively processed. Ill-formed applications are
rejected.




| ( ,

, C.Const
(Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Def height) as refer ), s) as conﬁg →
if delta >= height then conﬁg else
let , ,body, , , = NCicEnvironment.get checked def refer in
aux (0, [], body, s)
| ( , , C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,
(Ref.Decl|Ref.Ind |Ref.Con |Ref.CoFix ))), ) as conﬁg → conﬁg





A constant can represent very different objects, thus a deep pattern matching is used to
exploit all the information carried by the reference. If the reference points to a declaration (i.e.
an axiom) reduction stops. If the constant has a body and its height is bigger than the delta
parameter it is unfolded and its body is recursively reduced. Note that the choice of storing
the information regarding the height of the context not only in the environment but also in

A compact kernel for the CIC

95

the reference allows us to ask the environment the body of the object only when it is strictly
necessary, avoiding a possibly expensive lookup.




| ( ,

, C.Const (Ref.Ref
( ,Ref.Fix (ﬁxno ,recindex,height)) as refer ), s) as conﬁg →
if delta >= height then conﬁg else
(match
try Some (RS.from stack (List.nth s recindex))
with Failure → None
with
| None → conﬁg
| Some recparam →
let ﬁxes , , = NCicEnvironment.get checked ﬁxes or coﬁxes refer in
match reduce ˜delta:0 ˜subst context recparam with
| ( , ,C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Con )), ) as c →
let new s =
replace recindex s (RS.compute to stack ˜reduce:aux ˜unwind c)
in
let , , , ,body = List.nth ﬁxes ﬁxno in
aux (0, [], body, new s)
|
→ conﬁg)





The most interesting case is when the reference identifies a block of mutual recursive
definitions. We can again efficiently check if the height of the constant is greater then the
desired one, and if it is the case, we can check if the recursive argument of the function
(whose index is stored in the reference too) is a constructor. Only in that case the body of the
recursive function pointed by the reference is retrieved from the environment. The body of
the recursive function is reduced in a context new− s where its recursive argument (already
reduced in weak head normal form to expose a constructor) has been replaced with the reduct,
to avoid computing it again.

The reduction of a pattern matching is triggered if the matched term is a constructor or if it is
a coinductive function. In the second case the body of the coinductive function is reduced and
the guarded− by− constructors check (see Section 6·3) performed by the type checker ensures
it will expose a constructor in finite time. The arguments of the constructor are separated from

96

Asperti et al

the left parameters of its inductive type (see Section 2) with a call of split− nth, and the j-th
pattern matching case is reduced pushing on the stack these parameters.
5.1b The implemented reduction strategy: As we already highlighted, to achieve good type
checking performances it is usually better to avoid unnecessary reduction, thus a call-by-need
strategy seems to fit our requirements. When the system is used interactively, and the user
asks the system to reduce a term, such a strategy is however too aggressive. Consider for
example the following term




let primes := sieve 100 in
match primes with
[ nil ⇒ absurd from gt 0 100
| cons
⇒ pair (last primes) (length primes)]





In order to perform ι-reduction, primes is computed, and the second branch is taken. A byneed reduction strategy remembers the weak head normal form of primes, which is the list
of prime numbers less than 100 if sieve is implemented using an accumulator. The reduced
term is unmanageable: pair (last [2 ;. . . ; 97]) (length [2 ;. . . ; 97]). What the user probably
expects here is head linear reduct Danos & Regnier (2003):
let primes := sieve 100 in pair (last primes) (length primes)
The strategy implemented in Matita carries around both the reduct of a term (to avoid
reducing twice the same term in the spirit of the by-need strategy) and the term before
reduction, used in the unwind process.

module CallByValueByNameForUnwind’ = struct
type conﬁg = int ∗ env term list ∗ C.term ∗ stack term list
and stack term = conﬁg lazy t ∗ C.term lazy t (∗ cbv, cbn ∗)
and env term = conﬁg lazy t ∗ C.term lazy t (∗ cbv, cbn ∗)
let to env ˜reduce ˜unwind c = lazy (reduce c),lazy (unwind c)
let from stack (c, ) = Lazy.force c
let from stack list for unwind ˜unwind: l =
List .map (function ( ,c) → Lazy.force c) l
let from env (c, ) = Lazy.force c
let from env for unwind ˜unwind: ( ,c) = Lazy.force c
let stack to env ˜reduce: ˜unwind: conﬁg = conﬁg
let compute to env ˜reduce ˜unwind k e t =
lazy (reduce (k,e, t ,[])), lazy (unwind (k,e,t ,[]))
let compute to stack ˜reduce ˜unwind conﬁg =
lazy (reduce conﬁg ), lazy (unwind conﬁg)







The stack is a list of pairs: the first component is a closure that may be put in head normal
form according to the by-name strategy, while the second is the unreduced term obtained
unwinding lazily the pristine closure.
The same holds for the environment. The functions used by unwind always use the second
component, while on the first component the compute− to function perform reduction. All
computation is delayed using the lazy OCaml keyword, and is forced only when a configuration is pulled from the stack/environment.

A compact kernel for the CIC

97

5.2 Conversion
Our statistics show that, when type-checking real world terms, most of the terms checked
for conversion are actually identical. This suggests a simple but very effective strategy: two
terms are recursively compared, without triggering reduction. If the comparison fails, they
are both reduced to weak head normal form and compared again. In our implementation of
the conversion check, this check is done in the alpha− eq function.
The first control === done by alpha− eq checks physical equality (identity of memory location) followed by structural equality (both provided by the OCaml runtime). This check is
weaker then α-equivalence, even if we are using de Bruijn indices. The cause is the fact
that we store user-provided names inside binders to be able to show the user the same
names he gave in input. Anyway the vast majority of calls to are− convertible ends with that
comparison.

let are convertible ?(subst=[]) get exact relev =
let rec aux test eq only context t1 t2 =
let rec alpha eq test eq only t1 t2 =
if t1 === t2 then
true
else
match (t1,t2) with
| (C.Sort (C.Type a), C.Sort (C.Type b)) when not test eq only →
NCicEnvironment.universe leq a b
| (C.Sort (C.Type a), C.Sort (C.Type b)) →
NCicEnvironment.universe eq a b
| (C.Sort C.Prop,C.Sort (C.Type )) → (not test eq only)
| (C.Sort C.Prop, C.Sort C.Prop) → true







If the two terms are not structurally equal, terms are compared recursively. In the tradition
of the Extended Calculus of Constructions Constructions Luo (1990), the conversion relation
is weakened to an order relation called cumulativity that takes into account the inclusion of
lower universes into higher ones. The test− eq− only parameter is true only when comparing
the two sources of two products, and in that case the universe of propositions is not considered to be included in any data type universe, and universes are compared by co-inclusion
see 4·3.

Binders are crossed without comparing the name of the abstracted variable and a proper
context, needed to eventually trigger reduction, is built.

98

Asperti et al




| (C.Meta (n1,(s1, C. Irl i1 )), C.Meta (n2,(s2, C. Irl i2 )))
when n1 = n2 && s1 = s2 → true
| (C.Meta (n1,(s1, l1 )), C.Meta (n2,(s2, l2 ))) when n1 = n2 &&
let l1 = NCicUtils.expand local context l1 in
let l2 = NCicUtils.expand local context l2 in
(try List . for all2
(fun t1 t2 → aux test eq only context
(NCicSubstitution. lift s1 t1)
(NCicSubstitution. lift s2 t2))
l1 l2
with Invalid argument → assert false) → true





The comparison of metavariables is tricky. Since conversion does not perform unification,
two metavariables can be considered equal only if they are two occurrences of the same
metavariable (the check n1=n2) or if they are instantiated to convertible terms (see next code
block). If they are both equipped with an identity local context (lifted by the same amount)
they are considered equal without comparing the length of the local context: the equality of
i1 and i2 is ensured by the type checking algorithm. If at least one local context is not the
identity, both l1 and l2 are expanded into an explicit list of terms (an identity list, in case of
Irl) and their elements are pair-wise recursively compared after being properly lifted.




| C.Meta (n1,l1), →
(try
let , ,term, = NCicUtils.lookup subst n1 subst in
let term = NCicSubstitution.subst meta l1 term in
aux test eq only context term t2
with NCicUtils.Subst not found → false)
| , C.Meta (n2,l2) →
(try
let , ,term, = NCicUtils.lookup subst n2 subst in
let term = NCicSubstitution.subst meta l2 term in
aux test eq only context t1 term
with NCicUtils.Subst not found → false)





Again, since unification is not performed, the only chance to unify a metavariable with
another term is to have a substituted term for that metavariable that is convertible with the other
term. This is in general not necessary since reduction to normal form performs the substitution.
Anyway, according to our experience, anticipating the application of the substitution leads to
success early.


| (C.Appl ((C.Const r1) as hd1::tl1 ), C.Appl (C.Const r2::tl2))
when (Ref.eq r1 r2 &&
List .length (NCicEnvironment.get relevance r1) >= List.length tl1) →
let relevance = NCicEnvironment.get relevance r1 in
let relevance = match r1 with
| Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Con ( , , lno)) →
let , relevance = HExtlib.split nth lno relevance in
HExtlib.mk list false lno @ relevance
|
→ relevance
in
(try



A compact kernel for the CIC
HExtlib. list forall default3 var
(fun t1 t2 b → not b || aux test eq only context t1 t2 )
tl1 tl2 true relevance
with Invalid argument → false
| HExtlib.FailureAt fail →
let relevance = get exact relev ˜subst context hd1 tl1 in
let , relevance = HExtlib.split nth fail relevance in
let b,relevance = (match relevance with
| [] → assert false
| b :: tl → b,tl) in
if (not b) then
let , tl1 = HExtlib.split nth ( fail +1) tl1 in
let , tl2 = HExtlib.split nth ( fail +1) tl2 in
try
HExtlib. list forall default3
(fun t1 t2 b → not b || aux test eq only context t1 t2)
tl1 tl2 true relevance
with Invalid argument → false
else false )
| (C.Appl (hd1::tl1 ), C.Appl (hd2::tl2)) →
aux test eq only context hd1 hd2 &&
let relevance = get exact relev ˜subst context hd1 tl1 in
(try
HExtlib. list forall default3
(fun t1 t2 b → not b || aux test eq only context t1 t2)
tl1 tl2 true relevance
with Invalid argument → false)



99



In the case of applications, the check should consist of a recursive comparison on subterms. However, as we already mentioned, we implement a proof-irrelevance-aware application comparison: irrelevant arguments do not need to be compared since ideally they do
not contribute to the head normal form of closed terms. The type checker will ensure that
the irrelevant argument will never be put in head position independently of the context the
application will be put in.
How do we compute relevance? We distinguish a static and dynamic inference. The first
one is used when comparing two applications whose heads are constants: it depends on the
type of the constant alone and is computed when defining that constant. The static inference
results in a list of booleans which is best understood as a cache, indicating which argument
positions are statically known as irrelevant. The length of the list is equal to the number of
products with which the type of the constant begins; it is correct (meaning that positions
denoted as irrelevant must always be filled by irrelevant arguments), but possibly incomplete
because of two reasons:
– with dependent types the arity of a function is not fixed and can depend on the actual
value of arguments; it is thus impossible to completely specify its relevance with a fixed
length list;
– the actual sort of an argument can depend on the preceding arguments in subtle ways;
suppose for instance you have a constant


c: ∀ b. (match f b with [true ⇒ nat | false ⇒ True]) → . . .





for some function f ranging on booleans: the second arguments of c must be either of type
nat (whose sort is Type) or of type True (whose sort is Prop), i.e. relevant or irrelevant,
depending on the value of f b which is statically unknown.

100

Asperti et al

The statically inferred relevance list can be obtained by means of a call to the get− relevance
function of the environment.
The dynamic inference is used for every application, including applications whose head is
a constant, when the relevance list produced by the static inference is not sufficiently accurate.
It is performed by the get− exact− relev function defined in the type checker and received as a
parameter by are− convertible. This function takes as parameters the head of the application
and its arguments and, by substituting the arguments in the type of the head, computes the
types of all the arguments and, subsequently, their sorts9 ; it returns a list whose length is
equal to the number of arguments and whose elements are false or true depending on the
corresponding sort being Prop or not.
When comparing two applications whose heads are both constants, we first check that they
are indeed the same constant; then we retrieve from the environment the statically inferred
relevance list and by means of list− forall− default3− var we compare in parallel the two list
of arguments and the relevance, possibly extending the last with a default value (true) when
needed. If the i-th argument is not relevant no check is performed, otherwise the arguments
are recursively compared. If the check fails at argument n, a FailureAt n exception is raised:
in this case, the check is resumed at argument n with a dynamic relevance inference.
When comparing applications whose heads are not (both) constants, the check is performed
only according to the dynamic relevance inference, as we have no relevance cache to exploit.




| (C.Match (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind ( ,tyno, )) as ref1 ,outtype1,term1,pl1),
C.Match (ref2,outtype2,term2,pl2)) →
let , , itl , , = NCicEnvironment.get checked indtys ref1 in
let , ,ty, = List.nth itl tyno in
let rec remove prods ˜subst context ty =
let ty = whd ˜subst context ty in
match ty with
| C.Sort → ty
| C.Prod (name,so,ta) → remove prods ˜subst ((name,(C.Decl so))::context) ta
|
→ assert false
in
let is prop =
match remove prods ˜subst [] ty with
| C.Sort C.Prop → true
|
→ false
in
Ref.eq ref1 ref2 &&
aux test eq only context outtype1 outtype2 &&
(is prop || aux test eq only context term1 term2) &&
(try List . for all2 (aux test eq only context) pl1 pl2
with Invalid argument → false)
| (C.Implicit , ) | ( , C.Implicit ) → assert false
| ( , ) → false
in





In the case of pattern matching, the two terms are compared recursively: however, should
the sort of the term being matched be Prop, that term will not be included in the recursive
comparison.
Implicit arguments should not reach the kernel. Every other pair fails the α-conversion
check.
9 Computing the sorts of the arguments of an application by substitution on the type of the head

has proven to be on average more efficient than directly computing the sorts of the arguments.

A compact kernel for the CIC

101

In case the two terms fail the simple check implemented by alpha− eq we need to feed
them to our reduction machine. When the machine stops, we could unwind the resulting state
and repeats the α-equivalence test, but this is in general expensive because reduction can
exponentially increase terms size. We thus delay as much as possible unfolding, comparing
GKAM statuses.


if alpha eq test eq only t1 t2 then true
else convert machines (small delta step (0,[], t1 ,[])
in
aux false

(0,[], t2 ,[]))





The small− delta− step function is called on machines whose heads are not convertible. It
performs reduction of the machine whose head (of greater height) is more likely becoming
convertible to the other head (of smaller height). When no machine is candidate for reduction
(both have the same height) we reduce both to smaller heights.





let small delta step ( , ,t1, as m1) ( , ,t2, as m2) =
let h1 = height of t1 in
let h2 = height of t2 in
let delta = if h1 = h2 then max 0 (h1 −1) else min h1 h2 in
R.reduce ˜delta ˜subst context m1, R.reduce ˜delta ˜subst context m2, delta

The conversion check for machine statuses succeeds in the two following cases.




let rec convert machines ((k1,e1,t1,s1 as m1),(k2,e2,t2,s2 as m2),delta) =
(alpha eq test eq only (R.unwind (k1,e1,t1 ,[])) (R.unwind (k2,e2,t2 ,[])) &&
let relevance = match t1 with Const r → NE.get relevance r | → [] in
try
HExtlib. list forall default3
(fun t1 t2 b →
not b ||
let t1 = RS.from stack t1 in
let t2 = RS.from stack t2 in
convert machines (small delta step t1 t2)) s1 s2 true relevance
with Invalid argument → false) ||






The first case is when the heads of the machines are α-convertible and when all arguments
(the stack components) are pair-wise convertible. This test is weaker than full conversion, for
example when the heads are constant functions. Note that arguments are again compared up
to relevance (as it was done in the alpha− eq check).





(delta > 0 &&
let delta = delta − 1 in
let red = R.reduce ˜delta ˜subst context in
convert machines (red m1, red m2, delta))



If the first check fails we retry the machine conversion function reducing both machines
with a decreased delta parameter. This step will be repeated while delta is positive, thus ends
when terms are in weak head normal form, and thus are convertible if and only if the first
case of convert− matchines succeeds.

102

Asperti et al

6. Typechecking
The CicTypeChecker module implements the type-checking judgements for CIC terms and
objects. Terms are type-checked in a context, a metasenv and a substitution. As explained
in Section 2, the context maps the free variables of the term to their local declaration or
definition. Metavariables occurring in the term are either declared in the metasenv, or they
are defined in the subst. We maintain the invariant that contexts, metasenvs and substitutions
passed around in the implementation of the type-checker have already been type-checked.
With this invariant, we avoid type-checking again a definiens every time we retrieve it from
a context or a substitution. When the programmer invokes the typeof function from outside
the kernel, he needs to remember to respect the invariant since the typeof function does not
assert it at the beginning. On the other hand, when typecheck− obj is invoked, the invariant is
verified for the metasenv and substitution that are found in the object.
Each judgement is implemented by a function that raises an exception when fed with an illtyped term. The type-checking function on terms also returns the inferred type. The interface
of the module is the following one.

exception TypeCheckerFailure of string Lazy.t
exception AssertFailure of string Lazy.t
val typeof:
subst:NCic.substitution → metasenv:NCic.metasenv →
NCic.context → NCic.term → NCic.term
val typecheck obj : NCic.obj → unit







We analyse first the type-checking functions for contexts, metavariables and substitutions.
These functions are not exposed in the interface, but they are used internally by typecheck− obj.

let typecheck context ˜metasenv ˜subst context =
ignore
(List . fold right
(fun d context →
begin
match d with
,C.Decl t → ignore (typeof ˜metasenv ˜subst:[] context t)
| name,C.Def (te,ty) →
ignore (typeof ˜metasenv ˜subst:[] context ty );
let ty’ = typeof ˜metasenv ˜subst:[] context te in
if not (R.are convertible ˜subst context ty’ ty) then
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (Printf . sprintf (
”the type of the deﬁniens for %s in the context is not ”ˆˆ
”convertible with the declared one.\n”ˆˆ
”inferred type:\n%s\nexpected type:\n%s”)
name (PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty’)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty))))
end;
d :: context
) context [])







A context is well-typed if the terms in each context entry are closed in the part of the
context that follows (in list order). The terms may also contain metavariables that are either
declared in the metasenv passed in input, or that are defined in the subst passed in input. As

A compact kernel for the CIC

103

a precondition, we assume the metasenv and the substitution to be well-typed. If the context
entry is a definition, we must check that the declared and inferred type for the definiens are
convertible. Since reduction and conversion may diverge on terms that are not well-typed,
we must take care of always type-checking a term before feeding it to the NCicReduction
module.

A well-typed metasenv is an ordered list of declarations for metavariables. In order to avoid
cycles that do not make sense, the terms in each metavariable declaration may only contains
metavariables declared in the part of metasenv that precedes (in list order). Note that it
is not possible to have metavariables used in the metasenv but defined in a substitution:
an invariant of Matita is that substitutions generated outside the kernel are fully applied
to metasenvs before passing objects to the kernel. This allows to easily verify the lack of
cyclic dependencies between a variable in the metasenv and a variable in the substitution.
A metavariable declaration is given by its name, context and type. Since the type may contain
free variables declared in the context, we must remember to type-check the context first, and
to pass it to typeof before checking the type.

let typecheck subst ˜metasenv subst =
ignore
(List . fold left
(fun subst (i ,( ,context,ty,bo) as conj) →
if List .mem assoc i subst then
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (”duplicate meta ” ˆ string of int i ˆ
” in substitution ”)));
if List .mem assoc i metasenv then
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (”meta ” ˆ string of int i ˆ
” is both in the metasenv and in the substitution”)));
typecheck context ˜metasenv ˜subst context;
ignore (typeof ˜metasenv ˜subst context ty);
let ty’ = typeof ˜metasenv ˜subst context bo in
if not (R.are convertible ˜subst context ty’ ty) then
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (Printf . sprintf (
”the type of the deﬁniens for %d in the substitution is not ”ˆˆ
”convertible with the declared one.\n”ˆˆ
”inferred type:\n%s\nexpected type:\n%s”)
i
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty’)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty))));
subst @ [conj]
) [] subst)







104

Asperti et al

A well-typed substitution is an ordered list of definitions for metavariables. In order to
avoid cycles that are logically inconsistent and may lead to divergence, the terms in each
substitution definitions may only contains metavariables declared in the metasenv or in the
part of the substitution that precedes (in list order). As we did for contexts, we must remember
to verify the consistency of the inferred and declared types for the definiens. As we did for
metavariables, we must check the context first since the definiens and its type may contain
variables declared in the context.

The metasenv and substitution must be checked first and in this order before checking the
terms in the objects.


match kind with
| C.Constant ( , ,Some te,ty, ) →
let = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv [] ty in
let ty te = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv [] te in
if not (R.are convertible ˜subst [] ty te ty) then
raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (Printf.sprintf (
”the type of the body is not convertible with the declared one.\n”ˆˆ
”inferred type:\n%s\nexpected type:\n%s”)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context:[] ty te)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context:[] ty))))





A definition or theorem is well-typed when its type and body (definiens) are. Moreover, the
type inferred for the body must be convertible with the user declared type.




| C.Constant ( , ,None,ty, ) → ignore (typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv [] ty)
| C.Inductive ( , leftno , tyl , ) →
check mutual inductive defs uri ˜metasenv ˜subst leftno tyl



A declaration (an axiom) is well-typed when the declared type is. A block of mutual inductive types must satisfy a number of conditions that deserve their own test check− mutual−
inductive− defs, which will be described in Section 6·2.





| C.Fixpoint (inductive, ﬂ , ) →
let types, kl =
List . fold left
(fun (types,kl) ( ,name,k,ty, ) →
let = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv [] ty in
((name,C.Decl ty)::types, k :: kl)
) ([],[]) ﬂ
in
let len = List.length types in
let dﬂ , kl =
List . split (List .map2
(fun ( , , , ,bo) rno →
let dbo = debruijn uri len [] bo in
dbo, Evil rno)
ﬂ kl)
in



A compact kernel for the CIC

105

A Fixpoint represents a block of mutual (co)recursive functions, defined in the fl list. Each
function definition is given by a name, a type ty and a body bo. Since the functions are mutually
defined, a reference to any function in the block may occur in the body of a function in fl.
Since we are still type-checking the object, the object is not yet part of the environment (if it
is not in the library) or, if it was retrieved from the library, it is in the environment frozen stack
(the stack of objects being type-checked, see Section 4·2). In both cases, the environment will
raise an exception if we try to resolve a reference to a function in the block.
To solve this problem, we use the debruijn function (see Appendix C) that replaces every
recursive reference in a body bo with a de Bruijn index. The URI uri of the block is used
to detect recursive references. The i-th function in the block will be represented with the
(1+len−i)-th de Bruijn index where len is the number of recursively defined functions. In order
to maintain the invariant that a term always comes with a context that closes it, we precompute the context types that collects all function type declarations. Since we have the
invariant that contexts are well-typed, we check every function type before pushing it on top
of the environment. At the same time we also collect in the kl list all the recursive indices. The
recursive index of a recursive function is the index of the argument the functions performs
structural recursion on. The recursive index is undefined (0 in the implementation) for corecursive functions.
We are now ready to type-check every recursive function definition.




List . iter2 (fun ( ,name,x,ty, ) bo →
let ty bo = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv types bo in
if not (R.are convertible ˜subst types ty bo ty)
then raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (”(Co)Fix: ill−typed bodies”)))
else





For each function definition we also need to perform a different check if the block is made of
recursive of corecursive functions. In the first case, we must check totality of the functions
by verifying syntactically that the functions are defined by structural recursion on the x-th
argument. The check is performed by guarded− by− destructors described in Section 6·3. In
the second case we must check syntactically that the function is productive. The check is
performed by guarded− by− constructors, also described in Section 6·3.

106

Asperti et al

We present now the function typeof that checks if terms are well-typed. Then we will
present the most technical ones. The function is defined by structural recursion on the term,
and it augments the context when binders are met. Since the metasenv and substitution are
constant during the typechecking, we perform recursion in an auxiliary function.

let rec typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv context term =
let rec typeof aux context =
fun t → (∗prerr endline (PP.ppterm ˜metasenv ˜subst ˜context t);∗)
match t with
| C.Rel n →
(try
match List.nth context (n − 1) with
| ( ,C.Decl ty) → S. lift n ty
| ( ,C.Def ( ,ty)) → S. lift n ty
with Failure → raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy ”unbound variable”)))
| C.Sort (C.Type [false ,u]) → C.Sort (C.Type [true, u])
| C.Sort (C.Type ) →
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (”Cannot type an inferred type: ”ˆ
NCicPp.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context t)))
| C.Sort → C.Sort (C.Type NCicEnvironment.type0)
| C.Implicit → raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”Implicit found”))
| C.Meta (n,l) as t →
let canonical ctx ,ty =
try
let ,c, ,ty = U.lookup subst n subst in c,ty
with U.Subst not found → try
let ,c,ty = U.lookup meta n metasenv in c,ty
with U.Meta not found →
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (Printf . sprintf
”%s not found” (PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context t))))
in
check metasenv consistency t ˜subst ˜metasenv context canonical ctx l;
S.subst meta l ty
| C.Const ref → type of constant ref







The type of atoms which are not sorts is retrieved from the context in case of Rels or from
the metasenv or the substitution in case of metavariables.
Type universes are typed with their successor (represented by setting theirs first component
to true). Since the user is only allowed to write type universe variables, it is impossible that a

A compact kernel for the CIC

107

non singleton universe (or the successor of a universe) is a valid input for the typing function.
Moreover, the typing algorithm never types a synthesized type, thus it will never need to
typecheck the successor of a type. The impredicative sort Prop is typed with the smallest
possible universe type0 (defined as the maximum of the empty set).
In the latter two cases we must remember to relocate the metavariable definiens in the
local context, but only after checking the consistency between the local and global metavariable contexts. This is done by the check− metasenv− consistency function (see Appendix C).
In principle, the check is very simple:
(i) the local context and the canonical contexts must have the same length (or, equivalently,
the local context must instantiate every abstraction in the canonical context)
(ii) if the n-th entry in the canonical context is a declaration xn : T (x1 , . . . , xn−1 ), then the
type of the n-th term tn in the local context must be convertible to T (t1 , . . . , tn−1 )
(iii) if the n-th entry in the canonical context is a definition xn : T (x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) :=
t (x1 , . . . , xn−1 ), then the n-th term tn in the local context must be convertible to
t (t1 , . . . , tn−1 ).
In practice, the code of the function is quite complex since we exploit the optimized representation of local contexts (see 2·1·1) to speed up the checks as much as possible. The main
reason for these optimizations is that automatic proof search may generate hundreds of goals
containing many metavariables characterized by potentially long contexts. Thus, even a small
speed-up in this test can have a significant effect on the overall time of automatic proof search.
The type− of− constant function checks that data cached in the reference is coherent with the
one stored in the environment and if the constant has never been typed before, it recursively
check its type.

108

Asperti et al

The rules for dependent products, local definitions, λ-abstractions and applications are
standard for full PTSs. In particular, the sort− of− prod function (see Appendix C) computes
the sort of a product according to the PTS product formation rules. The eat− prods (also in
Appendix C) function verifies one at a time that the type of the n-th actual parameters is
convertible with the declared type for the formal parameter. In order to retrieve the latter
information, the head of the application is type-checked and its type is put in weak head
normal form and matched against a dependent product: the type of the first actual parameter
is the source type of the dependent product. The type of the second parameter is computed
from the target of the dependent product where the first bound parameter has been instantiated
with the actual parameter. The same procedure is used for the following ones.
Case analysis, the only case left to consider, is also the most involved one. This is partly
due to the special management of left (or constant) parameters (see Section 2·1d) during
case analysis. We can informally explain the management on a very trivial example: let’s
consider the following example (in the concrete syntax of Matita) of a non-mutual inductive
type having one left parameter, one right parameter and just one constructor.








inductive i (n:nat) : nat → Prop :=
k: ∀w. i n (f w)

Now, let’s consider a term u of type (i x y). Its normal form must be (k n w) for some n
and w such that the type (i n (f w)) of (k n w) is convertible to (i x y). Since n is a constant
parameter, we know that x is n and we can exploit this knowledge in case analysis by avoiding
to abstract the case branch on x. On the other hand, the knowledge about y being (f w) does not
provide to us a single value for w. Thus, the case branch is only abstracted on the constructor
parameter w and case analysis on (k n w) is expressed (in the concrete syntax of Matita) by








match k n w return λw1:nat.λx:k n w1.s with [ k w2 ⇒ p ]

The output type λw1:nat.λx:k n w.s, where s is a type for each w1 and x, is a schema of types
for all the right hand sides of the patterns (in this case λw2:nat.p). The interesting case is
when s is a type dependent on the actual value of w1 or x (such as being a natural number if
w1 is positive, or an empty type representing an impossible event if w1 is zero). Less artificial
examples are given by pattern matching over inductive types with more than one constructor,
where it is sometimes useful to return a different type according to the constructor being
matched. In this case, the output type is dependent on the value of the actual matched value.
The check to verify that the output type correctly matches the types inferred for each
pattern is very technical. We first compute the type ∀w2:nat.i n (f w) of the constructor k
applied to the left parameters (here just n); note that the abstraction on w2 exactly matches

A compact kernel for the CIC

109

the abstraction in the pattern, allowing us to consider the context w1:nat in which both
i n (f w) and p live. Then we instantiate, in the latter context, the output type schema with the
actual right parameters passed to i in the computed type, i.e. (f w) and with the constructor
applied to the passed parameters, obtaining s[(f w)/w1;(k n w2)/x] which is a sort that is
required to type the pattern body (p w2).
To summarize, in OCaml syntax, the same pattern matching example becomes as follows.


C.Match (i,
C.Lambda(”w2”, nat,
C.Lambda(”x”,C.Appl [C.Const i; n; C.Rel 1],
C.Appl [s; C.Rel 1; C.Rel 2])),
u,
[C.Lambda(”w1”, nat, p)])





In this expression, u is the term being matched and i is a reference to its type; the second line
states the return type of the case analysis, and the last line is a list of patterns: since we are
matching over a type having just one constructor, the list of patterns contains a single pattern,
abstracted over right parameters as described above. As for the return type, it expresses the
output type of any branch of a dependently-typed pattern matching and it is abstracted over
the right parameters of the type being matched but, similarly to a pattern, not on the left ones;
it also abstracted on the actual value being matched.
Now, let’s check the code implementing the typechecking in the case of the pattern matching.





| C.Match (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind ( ,tyno, )) as r ,outtype,term,pl) →
let outsort = typeof aux context outtype in
let inductive , leftno , itl , , = E.get checked indtys r in
let constructorsno =
let , , , cl = List.nth itl tyno in List .length cl
in
let parameters, arguments =
let ty = R.whd ˜subst context (typeof aux context term) in
let r ’, tl =
match ty with
C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind ) as r ’) → r ’,[]
| C.Appl (C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind ) as r ’) :: tl ) → r’, tl
|
→
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (Printf.sprintf
”Case analysis: analysed term %s is not an inductive one”
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context term)))) in
if not (Ref.eq r r ’) then
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (Printf.sprintf
(”Case analysis : analysed term type is %s, but is expected ” ˆˆ
”to be (an application of) %s”)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context (C.Const r’)))))
else
try HExtlib.split nth leftno tl
with
Failure
→
raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (Printf.sprintf
”%s is partially applied”
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty)))) in



110

Asperti et al

So far we have only checked that all the terms occurring in the pattern matching are well
typed, and that the type of the matched term is the declared inductive type.




(∗ let ’s control if the sort elimination is allowed: [( I q1 ... qr )| B] ∗)
let sort of ind type =
if parameters = [] then C.Const r
else C.Appl ((C.Const r)::parameters) in
let type of sort of ind ty = typeof aux context sort of ind type in
check allowed sort elimination ˜subst ˜metasenv r context
sort of ind type type of sort of ind ty outsort ;





This snippet performs a first key check by calling the check− allowed− sort− elimination procedure. Before describing it, we look at the description of the second and last key check,
which iterates on all the branches of the case analysis, to verify that the type of the patterns
match the output type schema as previously explained.

A compact kernel for the CIC

111

Note that the type inferred for the pattern match is the head beta normal form of the instantiation of the output type on the matched term. Since the output type is always a λ-abstraction,
without performing head beta reduction we will always infer a β-redex, that we do not want
to present to the user. Moreover, inferring a β-redex is likely to produce a performance loss in
reduction, since our heuristics to speed up conversion fail when comparing two types having
in deep positions respectively a β-redex and its β-reduct.
We focus now on the check− allowed− sort− elimination that does two jobs at once. The first
one is checking that the outtype abstractions match the right parameters of the inductive type
with one additional abstraction for the term being eliminated. The check is actually done on
the type of the outtype (called outsort) which has a product for each outtype λ-abstraction
and ends with the sort of the returned type.
The second job ensures that the elimination of an inductive type can be performed to
obtain the output type. The reason not to allow elimination lies in the distinction between
computationally relevant parts of a proof (when a term has sort Type) and parts which have
no computational content (terms whose sort is Prop). This distinction is crucial for code
exportation and proof-irrelevance: the computationally irrelevant subterms are completely
forgot during the automatic exportation of code. Thus, eliminating a non-informative type to
obtain an informative type must not be allowed, unless there is only one way in which the
elimination can be performed.

112

Asperti et al

The check is performed by the inner recursive function aux, taking the inductive type ind
(already applied to the left arguments) that during recursion gets also applied to the variables
bound by the products of the outsort. Eventually, it will become the type expected for the
matched term, which is the source of the last product of outsort. arity1 is initially the arity of
the inductive type applied to the left parameters. An invariant of the recursion is that arity1
is the type of ind. arity2 is initially the outsort.
If the two arities are products we perform the first job by checking if the source of the two
products (corresponding to a right parameter) are convertible. Then we proceed recursively
on their targets.
If arity1 is a sort and arity2 is a product, then the abstractions on the right parameters are
over and we conclude the first job by checking that the outsort ends with a final product over
the type ind of the matched term. This is also the case in which the second job is done: if the
target of the product in arity2 is Type, we ensure that no informative content escapes a noninformative term, by checking that the eliminated term type of the elimination either has no
constructors (is an empty type) or it has just one non-recursive constructor (singleton type)
depending only on non-informative types. The procedure is− non− informative checks that the
type of the single constructor of an inductive type is abstracted only over types whose sort is
Prop and is− non− recursive− singleton ensures that the type of the constructor constrty does
no recursive calls to the inductive type. In any other case, the elimination is admissible.
6.1 Well typedness of inductive definitions
Inductive types are one of key ingredients of CIC, used to model both datatypes and relations.
While the termination conditions for recursive functions have been sensibly relaxed over the
years, the well typedness conditions for inductive types are a more consolidated subject.

and check mutual inductive defs uri ˜metasenv ˜subst leftno tyl =
List . iter (fun ( , ,x, ) → ignore (typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv [] x)) tyl ;
let len = List.length tyl in
let tys = List.rev map (fun ( ,n,ty, ) → (n,(C.Decl ty))) tyl in







The first, easy, check is the well typedness of inductive types arity (the x component of tyl
entries), that have to live in an empty context. The next step is to analyse the constructors
of the inductive types, that live in a context where all the inductive types are defined (tys).
Note that since the arity of inductive types is a closed term lifting them is not needed when
generating a context.

A compact kernel for the CIC




113


(List . fold right
(fun ( , ,ty, cl ) i → (∗ i−th ind. type arity and constructors list ∗)
List . iter
(fun ( ,name,te) → (∗ constructor name and type ∗)



Four different checks have to be performed to accept an inductive type constructor:
(i) The left (fixed) parameters have to be used coherently. This implies both that every
constructor must abstract the very same left arguments as the inductive type, and that
the inductive type occurs applied to these parameters. The following code compares in
parallel the initial fragment of the context generated by the binders in the inductive type
arity and the binders in the constructor type.

The check that all inductive type occurrences are applied to the same left parameters is
performed along with check number 4.
(ii) The type has to be correct. To check that we use the debruijn function to change occurrences of the inductive types to references in the tys context. Here te is the inductive
constructor type and context has been previously checked to be well typed and contains
not only the inductive types arities but also the left parameters.




let con sort = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv context te in



(iii) The universe in which the inductive type lives has to be greater (or equal) to the ones of
its constructors.

114

Asperti et al





(match R.whd ˜subst context con sort, R.whd ˜subst [] ty sort with
(C.Sort (C.Type u1) as s1), (C.Sort (C.Type u2) as s2) →
if not (E.universe leq u1 u2) then
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (”The type ” ˆ PP.ppterm ˜metasenv ˜subst ˜context s1ˆ
” of the constructor is not included in the inductive” ˆ
” type sort ” ˆ PP.ppterm ˜metasenv ˜subst ˜context s2)))
| C.Sort , C.Sort C.Prop
| C.Sort , C.Sort C.Type → ()
| ,
→
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (”Wrong constructor or inductive arity shape”))));



(iv) The inductive type must occur only positively in the type of its constructors. This check is
far from being trivial, and the whole following section is dedicated to its implementation.





if not
( are all occurrences positive ˜subst context uri leftno
( i+leftno) leftno (len+leftno) te)
then
raise (TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (”Non positive occurrence in ”ˆNUri. string of uri uri ))))



6.2 Positivity conditions
It is well known that in the definition of inductive and coinductive types, a positivity condition
on the type of their constructors must be verified, in order to guarantee the logical consistency
of the system. With dependent types, this requirement must be strengthened to a property
known as strict positivity. This notion of positivity is justified by a translation from general inductive definitions (i.e. mutually defined, possibly nested inductive types) to a single
inductive type, which is guaranteed to be sound when the input types satisfy the strict positivity condition. The details are both lengthy and involved: the interested reader may check
Paulin–Mohring (1996) for a detailed account on the issue of inductive types and positivity.
In this section we will just state what strict positivity is and discuss the code implementing
the positivity check, occasionally hinting at the reasons behind the check.
Suppose we are checking an inductive type I , whose definition belongs to a block of k
mutually defined inductive types I1 , . . . , Ik . We have
I : l1 : T1 . . . lm : Tm .r1 : U1 . . . rn : Un .S,
where S is a sort, l1 . . . lm and r1 . . . rn are respectively the m left parameters and n right
parameters of I (T1 . . . Tm and U1 . . . Un being their types). For all constructors c of I ,
we want to ensure that any occurrence of the types I1 . . . Ik in the types of the arguments of c is strictly positive. This is performed by two mutually recursive procedures
are− all− occurrences− positive and strictly− positive. The check is triggered by the typechecker
invoking are− all− occurrences− positive on the type of any constructor k. This procedure is
defined by recursion on the type of the constructor, say
c : x1 : V1 . . . xh : Vh .O.

A compact kernel for the CIC

115

For all i = 1, . . . , h, if xi : Vi . · · · is a non-dependent product (meaning that xi does not
occur in the target of the product), we will check that I and any other inductive type mutually
defined with I occur only strictly positively in Vi (by means of a call to strictly− positive); if
on the other hand it is a dependent product, then I and its sibling inductive types must not
occur in Vi at all. Finally, the procedure also checks that O = I l1 · · · lm a1 · · · an , such that
I and its sibling inductive types do not occur in a1 . . . an .
The strictly− positive procedure checks the inductive types defined in the current block
occur only strictly positively in a type x1 : V1 . . . xh : Vh .V . The condition is satisfied if:
1. the inductive types defined in the current block do not occur neither in V1 . . . Vh nor in V ;
or
2. the inductive types defined in the current block do not occur in V1 . . . Vh and
(a) if V = I t1 · · · tp where I ∈ {I1 , . . . , Ik }, none of these types occurs in t1 . . . tp ;
(b) if V = I t1 · · · tl u1 · · · ur where I is the only inductive type defined in another
block with l left parameters, the types defined in the current block do not occur in
u1 . . . ur and a call to procedure are− all− occurrences− positive to check that the types
defined in the current block occur only positively in the (appropriately instantiated)
constructors of I t1 · · · tl succeeds.
The point 2b is particularly involved and deserves to be justified. Basically, we have a priori no knowledge about the way the right parameters of I are propagated by constructors in
recursive calls, so we do not want the types defined in the current block to occur in u1 . . . ur .
The situation is radically different if these types occur only in left positions. In this case we can
easily track their propagation. For what concerns the call to are− all− occurrences− positive, it
is needed because, as we mentioned before, the positivity check is justified by a syntactical
transformation which we are now going to show in a simple example. Note that the transformation is not actually performed in the code; it is only used to show its correctness.
Suppose we are defining two types in two different blocks, with the second type mentioning
the first one.


inductive list (A:Type) : Type :=
| nil : list A
| cons : A → list A → list A.
inductive t : Type :=
| k : list t → t .





Matita behaves as if the definition of t were converted in a mutual inductive definition of two
types:

inductive t’ : Type :=
| k’ : list t ’ → t ’
and list t ’ : Type :=
| nil ’ : list t ’
| cons’ : t ’ → list t ’ → list t ’.







list− t’ can be understood as the type whose constructors we are feeding to are− all−
occurrences− positive. In practice we perform the positivity check inside list− t’ as if it were
defined in the same block as t’.

116

Asperti et al

Now let’s see the code implementing the positivity check. are− all− occurrences− positive
takes as input a substitution and a context (as usual), the uri of the inductive definition we are
inspecting, the number of left parameters of the inductive type, the index i of the inductive
type whose constructor we are checking (to verify if it really inhabits that inductive type
Ref.Ind(uri,i)), the range (n,nn] of indices referring to the types defined in the current block,
the type te of the constructor and the number of left arguments indparamsno. The function is
defined by recursion on te.








(∗ the inductive type indexes are s. t . n < x <= nn ∗)
and are all occurrences positive ˜subst context uri indparamsno i n nn te =
match R.whd context te with
| C.Appl ((C.Rel m)::tl) as reduct when m = i →
check homogeneous call ˜subst context indparamsno n uri reduct tl;
List . for all (does not occur ˜subst context n nn) tl
| C.Rel m when m = i →
if indparamsno = 0 then
true
else
raise (TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (”Non−positive occurence in mutual inductive deﬁnition(s) [3]”ˆ
NUri. string of uri uri )))

The first two cases ensure that occurrences of the i-th inductive type are always consistently
applied to the left parameters, and that the inductive type itself is not occurring in any additional
constructor argument.

The next two items check the conditions on the leading products of the type of a constructor.
The first one corresponds to the condition on non-dependent products (as checked by the
first call to does− not− occur), while the second one implements the check for dependent
products.




|

→
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (”Malformed inductive constructor type ” ˆ
(NUri. string of uri uri ))))





Finally, we assert that in any other case, the type of the constructor is malformed. The
check− homogeneous− call function is in charge of checking that the list of terms tl has a prefix

A compact kernel for the CIC

117

of length indparamsno of variables corresponding to the fixed parameters of the inductive
type.

let check homogeneous call ˜subst context indparamsno n uri reduct tl =
let last =
List . fold left
(fun k x →
if k = 0 then 0
else
match R.whd context x with
| C.Rel m when m = n − (indparamsno − k) → k − 1
|
→ raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy
(”Argument ”ˆstring of int (indparamsno − k + 1) ˆ ” (of ” ˆ
string of int indparamsno ˆ ” ﬁxed) is not homogeneous in ”ˆ
”appl:\n”ˆ PP.ppterm ˜context ˜subst ˜metasenv:[] reduct))))
indparamsno tl
in
if last <> 0 then
raise (TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (”Non−positive occurence in mutual inductive deﬁnition(s) [2]”ˆ
NUri. string of uri uri )))







The actual positivity check is delegated to the function strictly− positive.

and strictly positive ˜subst context n nn indparamsno posuri te =
match R.whd context te with
| t when does not occur ˜subst context n nn t → true
| C.Rel when indparamsno = 0 → true
| C.Appl ((C.Rel m)::tl) as reduct when m > n && m <= nn →
check homogeneous call ˜subst context indparamsno n posuri reduct tl;
List . for all (does not occur ˜subst context n nn) tl
| C.Prod (name,so,ta) →
does not occur ˜subst context n nn so &&
strictly positive ˜subst ((name,C.Decl so)::context) (n+1) (nn+1)
indparamsno posuri ta







The first item in the pattern matching corresponds to the case 1 in the informal description.
As for cases 2a and 2b:
– in both cases, the inductive types defined in the current block must not occur in the
sources of leading products (as checked by the third item of the pattern matching);
– if the type we are checking ends with an inductive type with no parameters, cases 2a and
2b collapse and the check is vacuously satisfied (this corresponds to the second item of
the pattern matching);
– the forth item of the pattern matching corresponds to the remaining condition of case 2a.

118

Asperti et al

Finally, we have to perform the most complex part of the positivity check, corresponding to
case 2b in the informal discussion. The important difference here is that, to check the nested
inductive type occurrence, we do not invoke are− all− occurrences− positive, but a specialized function called weakly− positive. The code of weakly− positive is similar to the code of
are− all− occurrences− positive since it is used to check the constructors of the nested inductive
type, but it differs from it since it is supposed to check positivity with respect to the current
block of inductive definitions (which is not the block in which the nested inductive type was
defined). Moreover, weakly− positive can exploit the previous knowledge about the fact that
the nested type already passed the strictly positive check on its constructors with respect to
the block in which it was defined.
The description of strictly− positive is completed by its default case that captures all remaining non strictly positive terms:



|

→ false




Last, we see the code of the weakly− positive function, which is very similar to the function
are− all− occurrences− positive, but performing a slightly different check. The function is also
designed to work on constructor types where recursive parameters are identified not by indices,
but by the appropriate constant.

A compact kernel for the CIC

119

An occurrence of the type i’ whose constructors we are checking is weakly positive. To see
if a constant refers to i’, it is sufficient to check its uri and not its index, since the inductive
type i’ is not mutually defined with any other type and since i’ has already been typechecked
in advance (what we are doing now is checking that a reference to i’ from inside another
inductive type i is admissible, not checking that i’ is well typed).




| C.Prod (name,source,dest) when
does not occur ˜subst ((name,C.Decl source)::context) 0 1 dest →
(∗ dummy abstraction, so we behave as in the anonimous case ∗)
strictly positive ˜subst context n nn indparamsno posuri source &&
aux ((name,C.Decl source)::context) (n + 1) (nn + 1) dest
| C.Prod (name,source,dest) →
does not occur ˜subst context n nn source &&
aux ((name,C.Decl source)::context) (n + 1) (nn + 1) dest





In the case of an arrow or a dependent product, we first replace all the occurrences of i’ in
the source with a dummy. Then, we check that the indices between n and nn (referring to the
inductive types defined in another block) occur only positively (in the case of an arrow) or do
not occur (in the case of a dependent product) in the source.

In any other case, we are checking a malformed constructor type.
6.3 Ensuring termination of recursive functions
We now discuss the guarded− by− destructors algorithm (GD), which is used by the typechecker to ensure termination of functions defined by fixpoint. The algorithm checks that
recursive calls are applied to a strictly smaller parameter (in a sense that will be clear later).
In our setting, fixpoint definitions must be top level objects: this means that nested recursive
definitions are not allowed and should be replaced by multiple top-level fixpoints. To retain
the full expressive power of nested recursive definitions, we are compelled to allow a recursive
function to pass itself around as an argument to other recursive functions. Of course, this case
needs special care, to make sure that the recursive function passed as an argument is used in
a well-founded manner; to ensure termination even in this case, the algorithm must perform
a deep analysis, unfolding the fixpoints and keeping track of them too.
Before entering the details of the code we give a precise specification in prose to help the
reader understand the termination check.
Let p be a pattern used for matching a term v of inductive type (I largs rargs ), and let
x1 , . . . , xn0 be the variables bound by the pattern. Recursively at step k let xnk +1 , . . . , xnk+1
be the variables bound in a pattern used for matching either some xj or some applications of
xj (with j ≤ nk ). We say that if xi has type ∀z1 . . . zn .I largs rargs then the term bound by xi
applied to n arguments (possibly none) is smaller than v. In this case the typing conditions over
I grant that largs is equal to largs , and that this order is well founded. In the implementation
the variables xi are called safe and v, which in the interesting case is always a variable, is
called seed.
In the following example, only the terms bound by variables he and he’ are smaller than v,
while l,tl,hd,hd’,tl’ are safe.

120

Asperti et al









inductive list (T : Type) : Type := nil : list T | cons : T → list T → list T
inductive tree : Type := leaf : tree | node : list tree → nat → tree .
let v := node [ leaf ; node [] 2 ] 3 in
match v with
[ leaf ⇒ . . .
| node l
⇒
match l with
[ nil ⇒ . . .
| cons he tl ⇒
match tl with [ nil ⇒ . . .| cons he’ tl’ ⇒ . . .]]]

A more complex example involving higher order constructors is the following, where terms
bound to x, y and terms of the form g n and h n for any n are smaller.








inductive ord : Type := Zero : ord | Succ : ord → ord | Lim : (nat → ord) → ord.
let v := Succ (Lim f) in
match v with
[ Zero ⇒ . . .| Succ x ⇒ . . .
| Lim g ⇒
match g 4 with [ Zero ⇒ . . .| Succ y ⇒ . . .| Lim h ⇒ . . .]]

The desiderata would be to accept any well founded recursion w.r.t. this order relation
which is in general undecidable. Thus, we only accept functions that honor the following
decidable syntactic approximation. We say that a recursive function f x1 . . . xm is guarded
by destructors on the n-th argument when one of the following hold for each occurrence of
f in its definition
– f is applied to at least n arguments v1 . . . vk and vn generates only smaller terms (GST).
Ideally a term vn is in GST if for every possible instantiation with closed terms of its free
variables, it reduces to a term smaller than xn . Because of undecidability, we approximate
GST with the following syntactic rules10 :
– a term smaller than xn is in GST.
– if t reduces to a term in GST then t is in GST.
– if t is a case analysis end every branch is GST then t is in GST.

(†)

– f is passed to another recursive function g (already checked to be terminating) as the
k-th argument and the following conditions hold:
– the first k arguments of g are fixed, that is always passed unmodified to recursive calls.
Since we allow only top level fixpoints, the user can not define deep fixpoints fixing
some arguments by abstracting them outside the fixpoint.
– we build a term b representing a generic recursive invocation of g by unfolding g and
substituting:
• all fixed arguments with the actual ones (in which f may occur). Indeed these
arguments are the same in every recursive call.
10 Clearly our approximation of GST can be improved, for instance considering recursive func-

tions. The current rules proved to be sufficient to accept any recursive definition in the libraries
of Matita and Coq.

A compact kernel for the CIC

121

• the recursive argument with a fresh variable that is considered safe if the actual
argument passed to g by f is safe. The fact that it remains safe at each iteration
can be proved by induction on g.
• all remaining arguments with fresh variables representing generic terms we do not
statically know anything about.
• all occurrences of g applied to its fixed arguments with a fresh variable to avoid
unfolding g again.
The resulting term b has to be guarded by destructors.
The following example is accepted by Matita. The interesting function is count that passes
itself to fold.


inductive list (T : Type) : Type := nil : list T | cons : T → list T → list T
inductive tree : Type := leaf : tree | node : list (name ∗ tree) → name ∗ nat → tree .
let rec fold T f ( l : list T) acc :=
match l with
[ nil ⇒ acc
| cons he tl ⇒ fold T f tl ( f he acc )].
let snd := λ t. match t with [ pair b ⇒ b].
let rec count (t : tree ) : nat :=
match t with
[ leaf ⇒ O
| node l
⇒ 1 + fold ? (λ t,acc.acc + count (snd t)) l O].





What is actually checked for guardedness instead of the original call to fold is the following
term under the assumption that L is safe:




match L with
[ nil ⇒ ACC
| cons he tl ⇒ FOLD tl (ACC + count (match he with [ pair

b ⇒ b ]))]].



Note that the count call is guarded by destructors because of rule (†).
Matita allows mutually recursive function definitions at the top level. Thus we have modified the syntactic termination check explained above to the special case of a block of functions
recursive on arguments whose types are also mutually recursive. For instance it is possible to define the mutually recursive types of forests and trees and corecursive functions on
them:


inductive forest : Type := root : tree → forest → forest | empty : forest
with tree : Type := node : nat → forest → tree .
let rec size forest ( f : forest ) : nat :=
match f with [ root t f ⇒ size tree t + size forest f | empty ⇒ O ]
and size tree (t : tree ) : nat :=
match t with [ node f ⇒ S (size forest f ) ].





The function that implements the GD check is called guarded− by− destructors and the one
for GST is called is− really− smaller. The recursive− args and get− new− safes functions are
used in combination to detect safe and smaller terms. Let’s see in detail the code of these
functions.

122

Asperti et al

All the information regarding the seed, safe variables and unfolded fixpoints is kept in the
recfuns parameter of the guarded− by− destructors function.




and guarded by destructors r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv context recfuns t =
let recursor f k t = U.fold shift k k (fun k () → f k) () t in
let rec aux (context, recfuns , x as k) t =
try
match t with
| C.Rel m as t when is dangerous m recfuns →
raise (NotGuarded (lazy
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context t ˆ
” is a partial application of a ﬁx ”)))
| C.Appl ((C.Rel m)::tl) as t when is dangerous m recfuns →
let rec no = get recno m recfuns in
if not (List.length tl > rec no) then
raise (NotGuarded (lazy
(PP.ppterm ˜context ˜subst ˜metasenv t ˆ
” is a partial application of a ﬁx ”)))
else
let rec arg = List.nth tl rec no in
if not ( is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k rec arg) then
raise (NotGuarded (lazy (Printf.sprintf (”Recursive call %s, %s is not”
ˆˆ ” smaller.\ncontext:\n%s”) (PP.ppterm ˜context ˜subst ˜metasenv
t) (PP.ppterm ˜context ˜subst ˜metasenv rec arg)
(PP.ppcontext ˜subst ˜metasenv context))));
List . iter (aux k) tl





First of all, the algorithm checks if the term t to be checked is dangerous, i.e. it is a recursive
call to one of the functions defined in the current fixpoint block. In this case, it must be applied
at least up to the recursive parameter, the actual recursive argument must be really smaller
and all the arguments must be, recursively, guarded by destructors.




| C.Appl ((C.Rel m)::tl) when is unfolded m recfuns →
let ﬁxed args = get ﬁxed args m recfuns in
HExtlib. list iter default2
(fun x b → if not b then aux k x) tl false ﬁxed args





In the case of an application of a fixpoint which has already been unfolded, and whose body
we are traversing, the algorithm checks that any argument which has not been flagged as
“fixed” is guarded by destructors.




| C.Rel m →
(match List.nth context (m−1) with
| ,C.Decl → ()
| ,C.Def (bo, ) → aux k (S. lift m bo))
| C.Meta → ()





In the case of an index bound to a LetIn, we check that the body of the local definition
is guarded. As for metavariables, what we should do is to constrain the set of terms with
which a metavariable can be instantiated. Such a job would require some rework of our data
structures, which we felt would be overkill. Instead, we just state that any metavariable, by
itself, is guarded, even if some possible instantiations of it are not. This does not hamper the

A compact kernel for the CIC

123

logical consistency of the system in any way: the only drawback is that, when filling in a
subproof, the user does not get any hints on the constraints of well-guardedness, therefore he
might provide an unguarded term, which would initially be accepted by the refiner (outside
the kernel), but would be rejected when fed to the kernel.




| C.Appl (C.Const ((Ref.Ref (uri,Ref.Fix ( i ,recno, ))) as r ):: args) →
if List . exists (fun t → try aux k t;false with NotGuarded → true) args
then
let ﬂ , , = E. get checked ﬁxes or coﬁxes r in
let ctx tys , bos =
List . split (List .map (fun ( ,name, ,ty,bo) → (name, C.Decl ty), bo) ﬂ)
in
let ﬂ len = List.length ﬂ in
let bos = List.map (debruijn uri ﬂ len context) bos in
let j = List. fold left min max int (List.map (fun ( , , i , , )→ i) ﬂ) in
let ctx len = List.length context in
(∗ we may look for ﬁxed params not only up to j ... ∗)
let fa = ﬁxed args bos j ctx len ( ctx len + ﬂ len ) in
HExtlib. list iter default2
(fun x b → if not b then aux k x) args false fa ;
let context = context@ctx tys in
let ctx len = List.length context in
let extra recfuns =
HExtlib.list mapi (fun i → ctx len − i, UnfFix fa) ctx tys
in
let new k = context, extra recfuns@recfuns, x in
let bos and ks =
HExtlib.list mapi
(fun bo fno →
let bo and k =
eat or subst lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv j bo fa args new k
in
if
fno = i &&
List .length args > recno &&
(∗case where the recursive argument is already really smaller ∗)
is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k
(List .nth args recno)
then
let bo,(context, ,
as new k) = bo and k in
let bo, context’ =
eat lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv context (recno + 1 − j) bo in
let new context part, =
HExtlib. split nth (List .length context’ − List.length context)
context’ in
let k = List. fold right shift k new context part new k in
let context, recfuns , x = k in
let k = context, (1,Safe ):: recfuns , x in
bo,k
else
bo and k
) bos
in
List . iter (fun (bo,k) → aux k bo) bos and ks





When we are checking the application of a fixpoint definition, and some of the arguments
are not guarded, we perform a deep analysis by unfolding the fixpoint. We keep track of
which arguments are used by the fixpoint as ‘fixed’ parameters, and we check recursively that

124

Asperti et al

those which are not fixed are guarded. Then we extend the recfuns structure by adding the
indices referring to the recursive functions in the unfolded fixpoint, associated to the list of
fixed parameters. Finally we check the body of any recursive function defined in the unfolded
fixpoint in an appropriately updated context and recfuns.




| C.Match (Ref.Ref (uri,Ref.Ind (true , , )), outtype,term,pl) as t →
(match R.whd ˜subst context term with
| C.Rel m | C.Appl (C.Rel m :: ) as t when is safe m recfuns || m = x →
let ty = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv context term in
let dc ctx, dcl , start , stop =
specialize and abstract constrs ˜subst r uri r len context ty in
let args = match t with C.Appl ( ::tl) → tl | → [] in
aux k outtype;
List . iter (aux k) args;
List . iter2
(fun p ( ,dc) →
let rl = recursive args ˜subst ˜metasenv dc ctx start stop dc in
let p, k = get new safes ˜subst k p rl in
aux k p)
pl dcl
|
→ recursor aux k t)





When we encounter a case analysis on a term of an inductive type (say term is the term
being matched and ty its type) and term is (an application of) the seed or a safe index, term
and the outtype of the case analysis must be guarded (recursively) and for each pattern p =
Lambda (x1,t1, ( . . . Lambda (xm,tm,v) . . . )) in the pattern list pl, v should be guarded by
destructors under an extended list of safe indices, comprising the indices referring to each
recursive parameter of the corresponding constructor of ty; this is the case where new safe
indices are created, by means of the procedures recursive− args and get− new− safes.








| t → recursor aux k t
with
NotGuarded as exc →
let t ’ = R.whd ˜delta:0 ˜subst context t in
if t = t’ then raise exc
else aux k t’
in
try aux (context, recfuns , 1) t
with NotGuarded s → raise (TypeCheckerFailure s)

In any other case, the check is propagated through the use of a recursor. In case of failure,
as a last resort, the check is repeated on the weak head normal form of the term: this allows
to capture a strictly larger set of terms, and it cannot be easily dispensed off. As a major
drawback, it accepts also terms that are only weakly normalizing under a call-by-need strategy,
since not guarded diverging calls can be passed to affine abstractions. In any case, the system
remains logically consistent.
Two key tasks in the procedure are checking that a recursive call receives a smaller argument,
and updating the list of safe indices according to each pattern of a Match. The first task
is performed by the is− really− smaller procedure, that checks if a term, possibly fed with
arguments, will always return smaller arguments.

A compact kernel for the CIC


125


and is really smaller
r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv (context, recfuns, x as k) te
=
match R.whd ˜subst context te with
| C.Rel m when is safe m recfuns → true





If the term is a safe index, then it is really smaller.




| C.Lambda (name, s, t) →
is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv (shift k (name,C.Decl s) k) t
| C.Appl (he:: ) →
is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k he
| C.Rel
| C.Const (Ref.Ref ( , ,Ref.Con )) → false
| C.Appl []
| C.Const (Ref.Ref ( , ,Ref.Fix )) → assert false
| C.Meta → true





In the case of a lambda abstraction, its target must be really smaller. In the case of an application, then it is sufficient for its head to be really smaller.
Inductive type constructors and non-safe indices are not really smaller. In the case of a
metavariable, just like inside guarded− by− destructors, we temporarily accept any metavariable, accepting the possibility that the kernel will reject the subsequent instantiation.




| C.Match (Ref.Ref (uri,Ref.Ind ( isinductive , , )), outtype,term,pl) →
(match term with
| C.Rel m | C.Appl (C.Rel m :: ) when is safe m recfuns || m = x →
if not isinductive then
List . for all ( is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k) pl
else
let ty = typeof ˜subst ˜metasenv context term in
let dc ctx, dcl , start , stop =
specialize and abstract constrs ˜subst r uri r len context ty in
List . for all2
(fun p ( ,dc) →
let rl = recursive args ˜subst ˜metasenv dc ctx start stop dc in
let e, k = get new safes ˜subst k p rl in
is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k e)
pl dcl
|
→ List. for all ( is really smaller r uri r len ˜subst ˜metasenv k) pl)
|
→ assert false





Pattern matching is really smaller if it always produces a really smaller result in each branch.
If the matched term is the seed or it is safe, we extend the list of safe indices as we did in
guarded− by− destructors.
The term should always fall in one of the categories above. If it doesn’t, it must be a
product or a sort (meaning that its type is neither an inductive type, nor a function returning
an inductive type) or an implicit (which should never reach the kernel). Therefore, we raise
assert false.
The other critical task is to understand which indices should be added to the safe list when
matching the seed or another safe index. Informally, for each pattern in the case analysis,

126

Asperti et al

we add exactly those indices, corresponding to the arguments of a constructor, whose type is
mutually defined with the type of the term being matched.

The recursive− args procedure takes the type of a constructor and returns a list of booleans
whose length is equal to the arity of the constructor: each boolean is true if the corresponding
argument is recursive, false otherwise.

and get new safes ˜subst (context, recfuns , x as k) p rl =
match R.whd ˜subst context p, rl with
| C.Lambda (name,so,ta), b::tl →
let recfuns = (if b then [0,Safe] else []) @ recfuns in
get new safes ˜subst
( shift k (name,(C.Decl so)) (context, recfuns , x)) ta tl
| C.Meta as e, | e, [] → e, k
|
→ raise (AssertFailure (lazy ” Ill formed pattern”))







The get− new− safes procedure takes a pattern, the booleans obtained from recursive− args,
and the current safe list: it returns the body of the pattern (i.e. the pattern stripped of the outer
lambdas) and the updated safe list against which the body of the pattern must be checked.
In the case of functions defined by cofixpoint, we want to make sure that even if the function
might return a coinductive term constructed by an infinite tree of applications of constructors,
the system remains strongly normalizing. This is made possible by a lazy unfolding strategy,
performed only when the application of a corecursive function is observed by means of case
analysis: provided that a corecursive call appears only inside a constructor, the function can
be unfolded only a finite number of times, since the number of observations allowed on a
term cannot be infinite, being produced by recursive functions.
Ideally, the guarded by constructors check, which is dual to the guarded by destructors check
for recursive functions, should accept only all the terms whose head normal form is obtained
in a finite number of steps and is the application of a constructor of some coinductive type.
Because of undecidability, we are again obliged to propose a decidable syntactic criterion.
Let f be a corecursive function11 and t a term in which f occurs. Under the assumption
that f reduces to a constructor of a coinductive type, we need to decide if it is certain that t, for
each substitution of its free variables with closed terms, will bring the constructor generated
by f in head position. We call the set of all such terms t the certain (CE) set w.r.t. f and we
approximate it by the following rules:
– f t1 . . . tn is in CE if f does not occur in t1 . . . tn
– a case analysis whose branches are all in CE is in CE
11 0-ary function are also accepted

A compact kernel for the CIC

127

– an abstraction whose body is in CE is in CE
The set of guarded by constructors (GC) terms w.r.t. a corecursive function f is thus defined
by the following rules:
– t is in GC if f does not occurr in t
– a term k t1 . . . tn where k is a constructor of a coinductive type I with m left parameters
is in GC if one of the following holds for each non-left argument ti (i.e. when m < i):
– f does not occur in ti
– ti is in CE w.r.t. f
– a case analysis whose branches are all in GC is in GC
– an abstraction whose body is in GC is in CG if f does not occur in the type of the
abstracted variable
Since the rules for the CE and GC sets are quite similar, we have factorized both checks
in the procedure guarded− by− constructors. The h parameter of the auxiliary function aux is
used to distinguish between the two semantics. Concretely, it records whether a constructor
has been (just) crossed.




and guarded by constructors ˜subst ˜metasenv context t indURI indlen nn =
let rec aux context n nn h te =
match R.whd ˜subst context te with
| C.Rel m when m > n && m <= nn → h
| C.Rel | C.Meta → true





We always perform the analysis on the weak head normal form of the term: this captures more
recursive functions at the price of accepting terms which are only weakly normalizing under
a call-by-need strategy.
When checking an index corresponding to a corecursive definition belonging to the current
cofixpoint, we return h, i.e. true if we have crossed a constructor. Other indices and metavariables are always guarded.




| C.Sort
| C.Implicit
| C.Prod
| C.Const (Ref.Ref ( , ,Ref.Ind ))
| C.LetIn → raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”17”))





Since the term is in weak head normal form, sorts, implicit terms, products, inductive types
or local definitions are never considered by the algorithm.



| C.Lambda (name,so,de) →
does not occur ˜subst context n nn so &&
aux ((name,C.Decl so)::context) (n + 1) (nn + 1) h de




In the case of a lambda-abstraction, the source must not contain any corecursive call in the
source, and the target must be guarded by constructors.

128

Asperti et al




| C.Appl ((C.Rel m)::tl) when m > n && m <= nn →
h && List. for all (does not occur ˜subst context n nn) tl
| C.Const (Ref.Ref ( , ,Ref.Con )) → true




A corecursive call must appear under a constructor, and all of its arguments must be guarded
by constructors. (Co)-inductive constructors are guarded.

If we are checking an application of a constructor, we ensure that no corecursive calls appear in
the left parameters of the constructor and that all the arguments are guarded. In this recursive
check, h is set to true if the argument we are considering corresponds to a recursive parameter
of the constructor, false otherwise.




| C.Appl ((C.Match ( ,out,te,pl )):: )
| C.Match ( ,out,te, pl) as t →
let tl = match t with C.Appl ( ::tl) → tl | → [] in
List . for all (does not occur ˜subst context n nn) tl &&
does not occur ˜subst context n nn out &&
does not occur ˜subst context n nn te &&
List . for all (aux context n nn h) pl





When considering a case analysis or an applied case analysis, we check that recursive calls
do not appear in the term being matched, in the return type or in the possible arguments, and
that all the patterns be guarded by constructors.


| C.Const
| C.Appl as t → does not occur ˜subst context n nn t

in
aux context 0 nn false t







If the term being checked is any constant or application different from the ones considered
above, corecursive calls must not occur in the term.

A compact kernel for the CIC

129

7. Conclusions
The actual writing of the new kernel was done in four months, by four people, for a total
effort of about 10 men months12 .
Half of the code has been rewritten from scratch, while the remaining part has been adapted
to the new data structures. In the process, we have improved on a large number of small design
decisions that had a major cumulative impact on the complexity of the old kernel. We have
also been able to better delimit the trusted parts by abstracting them on code (mostly I/O code)
that does not need to be trusted. The trusted and untrusted functionalities were much more
interleaved in the old kernel and difficult to separate. This was the consequence of the evolution
of the system and the temptation to pollute the kernel with minor additional functionalities
operating on CIC-terms, originally meant for extra-kernel usages, but eventually ending up
to be invoked in the kernel too.
At the end, we were able to halve the size of the code and the number of functions making
up the kernel interface, as the following table shows.

source size
exported functions

New kernel
2300
38

Old kernel
5000
75

Coq †
7900
524

Coq
11400
647

The last column is the dimension of the kernel of Coq 8·113 to which we should also
add about 1600 lines of C code implementing an optimized reduction machine. However, the Coq kernel offers additional features (like a module system) that - deliberately
- are not implemented in Matita. The column marked with † is our, inevitably rough,
attempt to restrict the kernel to the same set of functionalities supported by Matita. The
datum is only indicative, but is just meant to give evidence that the new kernel is really
small.
The main differences between the two versions of CIC implemented in Coq and Matita
are:
– Recursive and co-recursive functions that are arbitrary terms in Coq (and in our old
kernel) and that we admit only as top level definitions. Thanks to λ-lifting, the expressive
power of the calculus is not affected, but more sophisticated termination checks are
required.
– Syntactic termination checks, that are more liberal in the new kernel of Matita with
respect to our old kernel and the one of Coq.
– Universe inference that is implemented in Coq (and in our old kernel) and that we
replaced with universe checking (in the spirit of the Explicit Polymorphic Extended
Calculus of Constructions).
– Computationally irrelevant arguments can be associated to constants, avoiding
their comparison in the conversion check. Neither Coq nor the old kernel had this
feature.

12 This is in line with our analysis in Asperti et al (2006), where we estimated in 12 men months

the time required to write a CIC-like kernel by a team of trained programmers.
13 Coq is also written in OCaml, so comparing lines is fair.

130

Asperti et al

The following table compares the latter functionalities.

universes
termination check

Old kernel
658
429

New kernel
35
272

Coq
577
514

We can remark that our old implementation and the one of Coq, which were based on similar data types, had similar sizes. In the case of termination checks, the smaller size of our
new kernel can be partially justified by better designed data structures, that allowed us to
collapse many similar cases, and by the choice of dropping recursive functions at the term
level. Universe checking is much simpler than universe inference despite having much nicer
properties (Courant 2002).
The type-checking performances of a kernel are mostly determined by the effectiveness of
the reduction and conversion heuristics (Sacerdoti Coen 2007) that may avoid unnecessary
reduction or that may reduce the size of the terms which are compared. In our tests, the
new and old kernel have roughly the same typechecking performances, with some notable
exceptions due to the constants height heuristics and to exploitation of proof irrelevance.
The present work is a first step towards the complete reimplementation of Matita. In particular, we expect that the new data structures will have a significant positive effect also on other
parts of the code, starting from the refinement code that closely mimics the type-checking
code. Indeed, the new representation of objects that have both a metavariable and a substitution have already been thought to simplify the data structures used outside the kernel to
represent proof progress via the Curry–Howard isomorphism.
Having reduced the size of the kernel, we would like to explore the possibility of introducing
some more complexity by extending the pattern matching construct of CIC to handle nested
patterns, and default patterns. These patterns are currently accepted by the system, but they
are represented internally by nesting multiple pattern matching constructs and by duplicating
patterns. The obtained term can be exponentially larger than the original one, with a major
impact on type-checking and conversion performances. Moreover, being quite different from
the one inserted by the user, it requires more extra-logical information for pretty-printing it
back in a readable form. Thus we feel that it is worthwhile to modify the kernel, even at the
price of adding some complexity to the data type used to represent terms.
Another future research direction for the kernel would be to substitute the current syntactic
termination checks with a type system based on size types Abel (2004). Although some
experiments in this direction has already been performed Barthe et al (2006), some work is still
needed to have a usable and user-friendly system for the Calculus of Inductive Constructions.
Finally, a compact kernel paves the way to a formalization of the correctness of the
implementation. Experiments in this direction has already been attempted for a subset of the
Calculus of Inductive Constructions Barras (1999). Although a complete formalization is
surely worthwhile, at present our main interest would be in the formalization of the most error
prone checks only, which comprise the termination checks for recursive and co-recursive
functions and the positivity conditions for inductive types.

The work was written while the first author was on leave at the Microsoft Research-INRIA
Joint Center in Orsay, France. He would like to thank the Center for the hospitality and the
financial support.

A compact kernel for the CIC

131

Appendix A
Syntax-directed type-checking rules
In this section, I will be short for
x1 : U1 . . . xl : Ul .
{inductive I1 : A1 := c11 : C11 . . . C1m1 : T1m1
with . . .
with In : An := cn1 : Cn1 . . . cnmn : Cnmn }
A.1 Environment formation rules (judgement E

W F , function typecheck− obj):

∅  WF
E  WF
d undeﬁned in E
E, Σ  W F
E, Σ, Φ  W F
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  T : S
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  b : T 
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  T ↓ T 
E ∪ Σ, Φ, deﬁnition d : T := b  W F
E  WF
d undeﬁned in E
E, Σ  W F
E, Σ, Φ  W F
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  T : S
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E ∪ Σ, Φ, axiom d : T  W F
E  WF
f1 , . . . , fn undeﬁned in E
E, Σ  W F
E, Σ, Φ  W F
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  Ti : Si
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  Si whd Si where Si is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1 ; . . . ; fn : Tn ]  bi : Ti
E, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1 ; . . . ; fn : Tn ]  Ti ↓ Ti
b1 , . . . , bn guarded by destructors (Sect. 6.3)
E ∪ Σ, Φ, let rec f1 : T1 := b1 and . . . and fn : Tn := bn  W F
E  WF
f1 , . . . , fn undeﬁned in E
E, Σ  W F
E, Σ, Φ  W F
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  Ti : Si
E, Σ, Φ, ∅  Si whd Si where Si is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1 ; . . . ; fn : Tn ]  bi : Ti
E, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1 ; . . . ; fn : Tn ]  Ti ↓ Ti
b1 , . . . , bn guarded by constructors (Sect. 6.3)
E ∪ Σ, Φ, let corec f1 : T1 := b1 and . . . and fn : Tn := bn  W F
E  WF

n
undeﬁned in E
E, Σ  W F
I1 , . . . , In , c11 , . . . , cm
n
all the conditions in Sect. 6.1 are satisﬁed
E ∪ Φ, Σ, I  W F

A.2 Metasenv formation rules (judgement E,

E, Σ, Φ  W F

W F , function typecheck− metasenv)

E, ∅  W F
E, Σ  W F
E, Σ, ∅, Γ  T : S

E, Σ, ∅, Γ  W F
?i undeﬁned in Σ
E, Σ, ∅, Γ  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E, Σ ∪ Γ ?i : T  W F

132

Asperti et al

A.3 Subst formation rules (judgement E, ,

W F , function typecheck− subst)

E, Σ, ∅  W F
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  W F
E, Σ, Φ  W F
?i undeﬁned in Σ and in Φ
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T : S
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t : T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T ↓ T 
E, Σ, Φ ∪ Γ ?i : T := t  W F

A.4 Context formation rules (judgement E, , ,

W F , function typecheck− context)

E, Σ, Φ, ∅  W F
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  W F
x is undeﬁned in Γ
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T : S
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪ x : T  W F
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  W F
x is undeﬁned in Γ
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T : S
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  S whd S  where S  is a sort
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t : T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T ↓ T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪ x : T := t  W F

A.5 Term typechecking rules (judgement E, , ,

t : T , function typeof)

A compact kernel for the CIC

E, Σ, Φ, Γ  (h t1 ) t2 · · · tn : T
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  h t1 t2 · · · tn : T
Σ = ∅
Φ = ∅
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t : T
Σ  , Φ , I ∈ E
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T whd Ik t1 · · · tl t1 · · · tq
Ak = Πy1 : Y1 . . . Πyq : Yq .s
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  ot : os
check allowed sort elimination Φ Σ Ik Γ (Ik t1 · · · tl ) Ak [t1 ···tl/x1 ···xl ] os ok (Sect. 6)
for all j = 1, . . . , mk E, Σ, Φ, Γ  pj : Tj
for all j = 1, . . . , mk E, Σ, Φ, Γ  Tj ↓ Δ{Cjk [t1 ···tl/x1 ···xl ] , ot, (ckj t1 · · · tl )}
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  match t in Ik return ot with [p1 |...|pmk ] : ot t1 · · · tq t

⎧
U t1 · · · tn t
⎪
⎨

if T = I t1 · · · tl t1 · · · tn ,
where I is an inductive type with
{T , U, t} =
l left parameters
⎪
⎩
x : T1 . {T2 , U, t x} if T = x : T1 .T2 }

133

134

Asperti et al

A.6 Term conversion rules (judgement E, , ,

T ↓ T , function are− convertible

↓= means test− eq− only = true; ↓• means that the current rule must be intended as two rules,
one with all the ↓• replaced by ↓, the other with all the ↓• replaced by ↓= )
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T =α T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T ↓= T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T ↓= T 
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T ↓ T 
Typeu ≤ Typev

Typev ≤ Typeu
are declared constraints (Sect. 4.3)
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  Typeu ↓= Typev

Typeu ≤ Typev
is a declared constraint (Sect. 4.3)
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  Typeu ↓ Typev
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  Prop ↓ Typeu
lc = t1 , . . . , tn
lc = t1 , . . . , tn
for all i = 1, . . . , n
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  ti ↓• ti
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ?j [lc] ↓• ?j [lc ]
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪ x : T1  T2 ↓• T2
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  T1 ↓= T1
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  Πx : T1 .T2 ↓• Πx : T1 .T2
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪ x : T  t ↓• t
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  λx : T.t ↓• λx : T  .t

In the rule above, no check is performed on the source of the abstractions, since we assume
we are comparing well-typed terms whose types are convertible.
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  h ↓• h
for all i = 1, . . . , n
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  ti ↓• ti
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  h t1 · · · tn ↓• h t1 · · · tn
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t1 ↓• t2
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  ot1 ↓• ot2
for all i = 1, . . . , n
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  pi ↓• pi
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  match t1 in I return ot1 with [p1 |...|pn ] ↓•
match t2 in I return ot2 with [p1 |...|pn ]
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t whd t

E, Σ, Φ, Γ  u whd u
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t ↓• u

E, Σ, Φ, Γ  t ↓• u

In the previous rule, t and u need not be weak head normal forms: any term obtained by t
(respectively, u) by reduction (even non head reduction) will do. Indeed, the less reduction is
performed, the more efficient the conversion test usually is.

A compact kernel for the CIC

135

A.7 Term reduction rules
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  (λx : T.u) t β u [t/x]
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  let (x : T ) := t in u ζ u [t/x]
∅, ∅, deﬁnition d : T := b ∈ E
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  d δ b
Γ  ?i : T := t ∈ Φ
E, Σ, Φ, Γ ?i [lc] δ t[lc]

E, Σ, Φ, Γ  match cik t1 · · · tl t1 · · · tn in Ik return ot with [p1 |...|pmk ] ι pi t1 ... tn
∅, ∅, let rec f1 : T1 := b1 and . . . and fn : Tn := bn ∈ E
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  fk t1 ...(cij u1 ... umj )... tm μ bk t1 ...(cij u1 ... umj )... tm

Note that (cji u1 . . . umj ) must occur in the position of the recursive argument of fk . This
implies that, for this reduction to be performed, fk must be applied at least up to its recursive
argument.
∅, ∅, let corec f1 : T1 := b1 and . . . and fn : Tn := bn ∈ E
E, Σ, Φ, Γ  match fk t1 ... tq in Ij return ot with [p1 |...|pmj ] ν
match bk t1 ... tq in Ij return ot with [p1 |...|pmj ]

Note that here n can be zero.
Appendix B
Kernel interface
The following are the functions exported by the kernel modules. We omit a few uninteresting
functions used only once to set up recursion between modules.

136

Asperti et al

Appendix C
Auxiliary functions
We do not extensively describe the following minor functions. We already gave intuition
about them when we described the code where they are used. The functions are listed in
alphabetical order.

A compact kernel for the CIC

137

138

Asperti et al

A compact kernel for the CIC

let rec eat lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv context n te =
match (n, R.whd ˜subst context te) with
| (0, ) → (te, context)
| (n, C.Lambda (name,so,ta)) when n > 0 →
eat lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv ((name,(C.Decl so))::context) (n − 1) ta
| (n, te) →
raise (AssertFailure (lazy (Printf . sprintf ”eat lambdas (%d, %s)” n
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context te))))

139










let rec eat or subst lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv n te to be subst args
(context, recfuns , x as k)
=
match n, R.whd ˜subst context te, to be subst, args with
| (n, C.Lambda (name,so,ta),true::to be subst,arg::args) when n > 0 →
eat or subst lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv (n − 1) (S.subst arg ta)
to be subst args k
| (n, C.Lambda (name,so,ta),false::to be subst,arg :: args) when n > 0 →
eat or subst lambdas ˜subst ˜metasenv (n − 1) ta to be subst args
( shift k (name,(C.Decl so)) k)
| ( , te , , ) → te, k
;;









let eat prods ˜subst ˜metasenv context he ty he args with ty =
let rec aux ty he = function
| [] → ty he
| (arg, ty arg ):: tl →
match R.whd ˜subst context ty he with
| C.Prod (n,s,t) →
if R. are convertible ˜subst context ty arg s then
aux (S.subst ˜avoid beta redexes:true arg t) tl
else
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (Printf . sprintf
(”Appl: wrong application of %s: the parameter %s has type”ˆˆ
”\n%s\nbut it should have type \n%s\nContext:\n%s\n”)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context he)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context arg)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context ty arg)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context s)
(PP.ppcontext ˜subst ˜metasenv context))))
|
→
raise
(TypeCheckerFailure
(lazy (Printf . sprintf
”Appl: %s is not a function, it cannot be applied”
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context
(let res = List.length tl in
let eaten = List.length args with ty − res in
(C.Appl
(he :: List .map fst
( fst (HExtlib. split nth eaten args with ty )))))))))
in
aux ty he args with ty





140

Asperti et al



let ﬁxed args bos j n nn =
let rec aux k acc = function
| C.Appl (C.Rel i::args) when i−k > n && i−k <= nn →
let rec combine l1 l2 =
match l1,l2 with
[],[] → []
| he1 :: tl1 , he2 :: tl2 → (he1,he2)::combine tl1 tl2
| he :: tl , [] → (false,C.Rel ˜−1)::combine tl [] (∗ dummy term ∗)
| [], :: → assert false
in
let lefts ,
= HExtlib.split nth (min j (List .length args)) args in
List .map (fun ((b,x),i) → b && x = C.Rel (k−i))
(HExtlib.list mapi (fun x i → x,i) (combine acc lefts ))
| t → U.fold (fun k → k+1) k aux acc t
in
List . fold left (aux 0)
(let rec f = function 0 → [] | n → true :: f (n−1) in f j ) bos




let rec head beta reduce ?(delta=max int) ?(upto=(−1)) t l =
match upto, t, l with
| 0, C.Appl l1, → C.Appl (l1 @ l)
| 0, t , [] → t
| 0, t ,
→ C.Appl (t::l)
| , C.Appl (hd::tl ),
→ head beta reduce ˜delta ˜upto hd (tl @ l)
| , C.Lambda( , ,bo), arg:: tl →
let bo = NCicSubstitution.subst arg bo in
head beta reduce ˜delta ˜upto:(upto − 1) bo tl
| , C.Const (Ref.Ref ( , Ref.Def height) as re ),
when delta <= height →
let , , bo, , ,
= NCicEnvironment.get checked def re in
head beta reduce ˜upto ˜delta bo l
| , t , [] → t
| , t,
→ C.Appl (t::l)




let rec instantiate parameters params c =
match c, params with
| c ,[] → c
| C.Prod ( , ,ta ), he :: tl → instantiate parameters tl (S.subst he ta)
| t , l → raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”1”))







and is non informative paramsno c =
let rec aux context c =
match R.whd context c with
| C.Prod (n,so,de) →
let s = typeof ˜subst :[] ˜metasenv:[] context so in
s = C.Sort C.Prop && aux ((n,(C.Decl so))::context) de
|
→ true in
let context ’, dx = split prods ˜subst :[] [] paramsno c in
aux context’ dx

and is non recursive singleton (Ref.Ref (uri , )) iname ity cty =
let ctx = [iname, C.Decl ity] in
let cty = debruijn uri 1 [] cty in
let len = List.length ctx in
let rec aux ctx n nn t =
match R.whd ctx t with
| C.Prod (name, src, tgt) →













A compact kernel for the CIC

141

does not occur ˜subst :[] ctx n nn src &&
aux ((name, C.Decl src) :: ctx) (n+1) (nn+1) tgt
| C.Rel k | C.Appl (C.Rel k :: ) when k = nn → true
|
→ assert false




in
aux ctx (len−1) len cty

let sort of prod ˜metasenv ˜subst context (name,s) (t1, t2) =
let t1 = R.whd ˜subst context t1 in
let t2 = R.whd ˜subst ((name,C.Decl s)::context) t2 in
match t1, t2 with
| C.Sort s1, C.Sort C.Prop → t2
| C.Sort (C.Type u1), C.Sort (C.Type u2) → C.Sort (C.Type (u1@u2))
| C.Sort ,C.Sort (C.Type ) → t2
| C.Meta ( ,( ,( C. Irl 0 | C.Ctx []))), C.Sort
| C.Meta ( ,( ,( C. Irl 0 | C.Ctx []))), C.Meta ( ,( ,( C. Irl 0 | C.Ctx [])))
| C.Sort , C.Meta ( ,( ,( C. Irl 0 | C.Ctx []))) → t2
|
→
raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy (Printf.sprintf
”Prod: expected two sorts, found = %s, %s”
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context t1)
(PP.ppterm ˜subst ˜metasenv ˜context t2))))
;;




let specialize and abstract constrs ˜subst r uri r len context ty term =
let cl = specialize inductive type constrs ˜subst context ty term in
let len = List.length context in
let context dcl =
match E.get checked obj r uri with
| , , , , C.Inductive ( , , tys , ) →
context @ List.map (fun ( ,name,arity, ) → name,C.Decl arity) tys
|
→ assert false
in
context dcl ,
List .map (fun ( ,id,ty) → id, debruijn r uri r len context ty) cl ,
len , len + r len




let specialize inductive type constrs ˜subst context ty term =
match R.whd ˜subst context ty term with
| C.Const (Ref.Ref (uri,Ref.Ind ( , i , )) as ref)
| C.Appl (C.Const (Ref.Ref (uri,Ref.Ind ( , i , )) as ref) ::
) as ty →
let args = match ty with C.Appl ( ::tl) → tl | → [] in
let is ind , leftno , itl , attrs , i = E.get checked indtys ref in
let left args , = HExtlib.split nth leftno args in
let , , , cl = List.nth itl i in
List .map
(fun (rel ,name,ty) → rel, name, instantiate parameters left args ty) cl
|
→ assert false




















(∗ if n < 0, then splits all prods from an arity, returning a sort ∗)
let rec split prods ˜subst context n te =
match (n, R.whd ˜subst context te) with
| (0, ) → context,te
| (n, C.Sort ) when n <= 0 → context,te
| (n, C.Prod (name,so,ta)) →
split prods ˜subst ((name,(C.Decl so))::context) (n − 1) ta
| ( , ) → raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”split prods”))

142

Asperti et al






and type of branch ˜subst context leftno outty cons tycons liftno =
match R.whd ˜subst context tycons with
| C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind )) → C.Appl [S.lift liftno outty ; cons]
| C.Appl (C.Const (Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Ind )):: tl ) →
let ,arguments = HExtlib.split nth leftno tl in
C.Appl (S. lift liftno outty :: arguments@[cons])
| C.Prod (name,so,de) →
let cons =
match S.lift 1 cons with
| C.Appl l → C.Appl (l@[C.Rel 1])
| t → C.Appl [t ; C.Rel 1]
in
C.Prod (name,so,
type of branch ˜subst ((name,(C.Decl so))::context)
leftno outty cons de ( liftno +1))
|
→ raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”type of branch”))


and type of constant ((Ref.Ref (uri , )) as ref) =
let error () =
raise (TypeCheckerFailure (lazy ”Inconsistent cached infos in reference ”))
in
match E.get checked obj uri, ref with
| ( , , , ,C.Inductive(isind1 ,lno1, tl , )), Ref.Ref( ,Ref.Ind ( isind2 , i ,lno2))→
if isind1 <> isind2 || lno1 <> lno2 then error ();
let , , arity , = List.nth tl i in arity
| ( , , , ,C.Inductive ( ,lno1, tl , )), Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Con (i, j ,lno2)) →
if lno1 <> lno2 then error ();
let , , , cl = List.nth tl i in
let , , arity = List.nth cl ( j−1) in
arity
| ( , , , ,C.Fixpoint ( false , ﬂ , )), Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.CoFix i) →
let , , , arity , = List.nth ﬂ i in
arity
| ( ,h1, , ,C.Fixpoint (true, ﬂ , )), Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Fix ( i ,recno2,h2)) →
let , ,recno1, arity , = List.nth ﬂ i in
if h1 <> h2 || recno1 <> recno2 then error ();
arity
| ( , , , ,C.Constant ( , , ,ty, )), Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Decl) → ty
| ( ,h1, , ,C.Constant ( , , ,ty, )), Ref.Ref ( ,Ref.Def h2) →
if h1 <> h2 then error ();
ty
|
→ raise (AssertFailure (lazy ”type of constant: environment/reference”))








References
Abel A 2004 Termination checking with types. Theoretical informatics and applications 38: 277–319
Asperti A 1992 A categorical understanding of environment machines. J. Funct. Program 2(1): 23–59
Asperti A, Ricciotti W 2008 About the formalization of some results by chebyshev in number theory.
Invited talk at TYPES’08, Torino, Italy
Asperti A, Sacerdoti Coen C, Tassi E, Zacchiroli S 2006 Crafting a proof assistant. In: Proceedings
of Types 2006: Conference of the Types Project. Nottingham, UK – April 18–21, Springer-Verlag,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, to appear
Barendregt H 1992 Lambda Calculi with Types. In: Abramsky, Samson and others (eds) Handbook
of Logic in Computer Science, vol. 2, Oxford University Press

A compact kernel for the CIC

143

Barras B 1999 Auto-validation d’un système de preuves avec familles inductives. Thèse de doctorat,
Universitée Paris 7
Barthe G, Ruys M, Barendregt H 1995 A two-level approach towards lean proof-checking. In: Types
for Proofs and Programs (Types 1995), Springer-Verlag, LNCS, 1158: 16–35
Barthe G, Grégoire B, Pastawski F 2006 Type-based termination of recursive definitions in the Calculus
of Inductive Constructions. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Logic for
Programming Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning (LPAR’06), Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence, to appear
Bertot Y, Castéran P 2004 Interactive theorem proving and program development. Texts in Theoretical
Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, iSBN-3-540-20854-2
Boutin S 1997 Using re ection to build efficient and certified decision procedures. In: M Abadi editors
TI (eds) Theoretical Aspect of Computer Software TACS’97, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer-Verlag, 1281: 515–529
Courant J 2002 Explicit universes for the calculus of constructions. In: Theorem Proving in Higher
Order Logics: 15th International Conference 115–130
Crégut P 1990 An abstract machine for lambda-terms normalization. In: LISP and Functional Programming, 333–340
Crégut P 2007 Strongly reducing variants of the krivine abstract machine. Higher- Order and Symbolic
Computation 20(3): 209–230
Danos V, Regnier L 2003 How abstract machines implement head linear reduction, submitted for
publication
Dybjer P 1997 Inductive families. Formal Aspects of Computing 6(4): 440–465
Geuvers H 1993 Logics and Type Systems. Ph.D. dissertation, Catholic University Nijmegen
Geuvers H, Jojgov G I 2002 Open proofs and open terms: A basis for interactive logic. In: Bradfield J
(ed) Computer Science Logic: 16th International Workshop, CSL 2002, Springer-Verlag, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 2471: 537–552
Giménez E 1998 Structural recursive definitions in type theory. In: ICALP, 397–408
Gonthier G 2005 A computer-checked proof of the four-colour theorem. Available at
http://research.microsoft.com/ gonthier/4colproof.pdf
Grégoire B 2003 Compilation des termes de preuves: un (nouveau) mariage entre coq et ocaml.
Thése de doctorat, spécialité informatique, Université Paris 7, école Polytechnique, France, URL
http://www.sop.inria.fr/everest/personnel/Benjamin.Gregoire/Publi/gregoire these.ps.gz
Huet G, Kahn G, Paulin-Mohring C 1998 The Coq Proof Assistant. A Tutorial
Johnsson T 1985 Lambda lifting: Transforming programs to recursive equations. In: Proc. of Functional programming languages and computer architecture. Nancy, France, Sept 1985
Luo Z 1990 An Extended Calculus of Constructions. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh
McBride C 1999 Dependently typed functional programs and their proofs. PhD thesis, University of
Edinburgh
Miquel A, Werner B 2003 The not so simple proof-irrelevant model of CC. In: H Geuvers, F Wiedijk
(eds) Types for Proofs and Programs: International Workshop, TYPES 2002, Springer-Verlag,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2646: 240–258
Muoz C 1997 A calculus of substitutions for incomplete-proof representation in type theory. PhD
thesis, INRIA
Paulin-Mohring C 1996 Définitions inductives en théorie des types d’ordre supŕieur. Habilitation à diriger les recherches, Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, URL http://www.lri.fr/
paulin/habilitation.ps.gz
Peyton-Jones SL 1987 The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages. Prentice-Hall
Pollack R 1994 The theory of lego: A proof checker for the extended calculus of constructions. PhD
thesis, PhD thesis, Univ. of Edinburgh
Sacerdoti Coen C 2004a Mathematical knowledge management and interactive theorem proving. PhD
thesis, University of Bologna, technical Report UBLCS 2004-5

144

Asperti et al

Sacerdoti Coen C 2004b) Mathematical libraries as proof assistant environments. In: Andrea Asperti,
A T Grzegorz Bancerek (ed) Proceedings of Mathematical Knowledge Management 2004,
Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3119: 332–346
Sacerdoti Coen C 2007 Reduction and conversion strategies for the calculus of (co)inductive constructions: Part i. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Reduction Strategies in
Rewriting and Programming, Elsevier, ENTCS, 174: 97–118
van Benthem Jutting L, McKinna J, Pollack R 1994 Checking algorithms for Pure Type Systems.
In: Barendregt, Nipkow (eds) TYPES’93: Workshop on Types for Proofs and Programs, Selected
Papers, Springer-Verlag, LNCS, 806: 19–61,
URL http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rpollack/export/JMPchecking.ps.gz
Werner B 1994 Une théorie des Constructions Inductives. PhD thesis, Université Paris VII
Werner B 1997 Sets in types, types in sets. In: Abadi M, editors TI (eds) Theoretical Aspect of Computer
Software TACS’97, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 1281: 530–546
Werner B 2008 Faire simple pour pouvoir faire compliqué. contributions à une théorie des types
pratique. Habilitation à diriger les recherches, Université Paris sud, URL
http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/Labo/Benjamin.Werner/annonceHDR.html
Wiedijk F 2006 The seventeen provers of the world. LNAI 3600

